Doubt global warming? The planet won't tell a lie





Pilkey and Young will be available for a live online chat at 1 p.m. ET today. Post comments and questions at theforum.usatoday.com.
A recent Rasmussen poll suggests that an alarming number of Americans believe scientists have falsified their data to sell global warming to the public. Add this to some embarrassing comments made in the e-mails stolen from the Climatic Research Unit at East Anglia University in England, and it has been a long, hot autumn for climate scientists.
Why is there so much confusion about whether the planet is warming? We believe a big part of the problem centers on the use of earth surface temperature data as a direct measure of warming. Where do you stick the thermometer? What matters most: Daytime highs? Nighttime lows? Summer or winter temperatures? Trying to determine whether the planet is warming in this fashion seems fraught with peril.
One doesn't need to measure thousands of temperatures to find conclusive evidence that the planet is warming. The earth does the averaging for us. Many physical and biological characteristics show that the earth is warming and has been for decades.
Clear evidence
Studies from both hemispheres indicate that 95% of the world's alpine glaciers, excluding Antarctica, are retreating. Glacier National Park in Montana is down to 26 named glaciers from 150 in 1850, and if this trend continues, the park is expected to be ice-free by 2020. Glaciers in the Himalayas are shrinking so rapidly that the summer flow of the major rivers (Indus, Ganges, Mekong, Yellow, Yangtze) they feed might eventually be  affected.
Permafrost regions are thawing in high northern latitudes, causing buildings to sink and roads to crumble. Melting permafrost is  the reason Arctic shorelines are retreating,  forcing the relocation of Inupiat Eskimo villages along the shore.
The great ice sheets are all retreating. The Greenland ice sheet melting began to accelerate in the 1990s, and the margin of the entire ice mass is melting even in its northernmost reaches. The West Antarctic Ice Sheet has begun extensive melting, mostly since 2000. More recently, the first indication that the larger East Antarctic Ice Sheet was melting and contributing to the sea level rise was reported last month in Nature Geoscience.
Sea level rising
The rate of rise in sea level has sped up over the past century. A tide gauge on a pier in Duck, N.C., says the sea level is rising at 1.5 feet a century. The Arctic Ocean's ice cover is shrinking and could disappear, endangering animals that depend on the ice for  their survival.
One can argue for hours whether this year was warmer or colder than last. To us, it doesn't matter. We should be reading the earth, not thermometers. The earth is clearly warming, and sea level is clearly rising.
In order to convince a skeptical public that global change is real, scientists and funding agencies need to invest more in field measurements and monitoring rather than computer modeled predictions.
As for the skeptics, it's time to get off the atmospheric temperature kick and read the earth. We also believe the science clearly indicates that humans are playing a new, and critical role in driving that warming. But, lack of clarity in the exact degree that humans are causing global warming should not be used as an excuse to ignore the monumental changes that rising sea level and changing climate will bring to the planet, and our society.
Orrin H. Pilkey is professor emeritus at Duke University's Nicholas School of the Environment. Rob Young is director of Western Carolina University's Program for the Study of Developed Shorelines. 



Climate change: A civil rights issue for blacks





Climate change is more than an environmental issue. It is a human rights and economic justice issue. Why? Because though climate change impacts all of us, different nations, and different communities within nations, experience the effects of climate change in varying ways, some worse than others.
This point was clearly made at last month's U.N. climate change conference in Copenhagen, where it quickly became evident that the rich and powerful nations -- particularly the U.S. and members of the European Union -- dictate the debate at the expense of poorer countries. That needs to change.
I was part of the only African-American delegation at the conference as a member of the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies' Commission to Engage African Americans on Climate Change. We were there because African Americans have a dog in this fight. We produce less greenhouse gas emissions (about 20% less than other Americans, according to a Congressional Black Caucus Foundation study),  but we bear a greater burden in terms of pollution and climate change.
Robert Bullard, who runs an environmental justice program at Clark Atlanta University, has noted that the adverse impacts of climate change fall most heavily on people of color who are concentrated in urban centers, coastal regions and areas where the air quality is poor.
After Copenhagen, the U.S. has committed to reduce emission levels and has begun the slow transition to a low-carbon economy. But these policies are likely to increase the cost of gasoline and electricity, which disproportionately impact people of color. The non-partisan Center for Budget and Policy Priorities says that even a modest 15% reduction in greenhouse-gas emissions would cost the poorest fifth of Americans an average of about $750 a year per household.  While both the Senate and House  energy bills include proposals to offset costs to help the poor, the aid allotted is less than is necessary to fully protect low-income consumers.
According to a Joint Center poll on global warming, 54% of African Americans considered it a major problem and 24% a moderate problem. Awareness, however, has not resulted in activism.
If African Americans are not fully engaged in the climate justice movement, and if the differential impacts of new policies are not explored, the poor will pay from their pocketbooks and with their health. That is why climate change is not just an environmental issue, but an important civil rights issue for people of color.
Julianne Malveaux is president of Bennett College for Women in Greensboro, N.C. 



Why climate change spurs whining about cold snaps





Global warming has many good and bad effects, but one that is becoming especially clear is that it makes us all weenies when it comes to colder weather.
You might have noticed that this winter is cold. OK. But it's not nearly as nasty as, say, the late 1970s, which brought the three coldest consecutive U.S. winters in the entire record (which started in 1895). The last winter of any consequence was 2000-01, but that was only the 26th coldest. Where this one will wind up  no one can say, but I would be surprised if it even gets to the bottom 20.
Blame global warming
So why all the bellyaching? Well, it turns out you can blame your current discomfort on global warming. Greenhouse gases, like carbon dioxide and methane, warm up winters more than summers. In other words, since the second warming of the 20th century began more than 30 years ago, it's the coldest days of the winter that have warmed up more than any others -- and our bodies adapted. So when a truly cold winter shows up, people are physiologically and psychologically shocked.
The coldest temperatures in the Lower 48 are caused by big high pressure systems that form in northwestern North America or (rarely) Siberia. They are blown southward by unusual waves in the jet stream that should become less common in a warmer world. As these are the systems most susceptible to greenhouse warming, extreme cold "outbreaks," like the two we have seen this January, should become more moderate and less frequent.
There are real consequences when certain extreme types of weather become rarer, or when they visit places where they are very uncommon: Besides making people uncomfortable, they tend to kill. But as luck would have it, this effect has been studied more for heat waves than it has for cold.
The U.N.'s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which purports to be the prime authority on all things climatic, has maintained for years that global warming's more frequent heat waves will kill increasing numbers of city dwellers. If so,  we should be seeing more headlines of heat-related deaths in urban areas. Indeed, cities laden with brick and concrete warm up on their own, global warming or not.
In reality, as heat waves become more frequent, fewer people die in them because they adapt. There's hardly any heat-related mortality in Tampa or Phoenix (despite large populations of retirees) because heat waves are common. The only large U.S. city that shows a recent spike in heat-related mortality is  Seattle, because heat is rare there.
What about cold spells?
But virtually nowhere is the U.N. on record that the same phenomenon holds true for cold. The great cold wave of Christmas 1983 killed dozens in South Carolina, where cold is rare, but hardly anyone in Chicago, where everyone expects minus-20 wind chills. This winter in northern India, more than 300 deaths have been attributed to "intense cold"  -- even though the lowest recorded temperature in the state having the most deaths was 39 degrees.
All this underscores the reality that "heat" and "cold," while having real and sometimes dire consequences, are largely a matter of perception. For those of us fortunate enough to have access to adequate clothing and shelter, this winter merely holds the lesson that sometimes, we need to stop complaining about the weather and just deal with it.
Patrick J. Michaels is a senior fellow in environmental studies at the Cato Institute and co-author of Climate of Extremes: Global Warming Science They Don't Want You to Know. 

No higher ground for butterflies; Species feel the squeeze of environmental change





A study of beleaguered butterflies in California provides some of the best clues yet as to how other animals may react to climate change, scientists say.
The unprecedented, 35-year analysis of butterfly populations in the Sierra Nevada details how several species are fleeing to higher elevations to escape warming temperatures.
Those butterflies that already live on mountaintops and can't adjust to the heat have "nowhere else to go but heaven," says Arthur Shapiro, a biologist at University of California-Davis who collected the data.
Butterflies have long been regarded as an early warning indicator for climate change. Their short life cycles and high sensitivity to temperature make them especially vulnerable, says Matthew Forister, a biologist at the University of Nevada-Reno and the study's lead author.
"Like polar bears, these high-elevation butterflies were already living in extreme environments, and now they don't have any options" for escape, Forister says. He says butterfly populations have always shifted over time, but the destruction of their habitat has occurred at an accelerated pace in recent years because of urbanization and warming temperatures.
"Their environment is changing so quickly that they just can't cope," Forister says.
The study, published last month in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, tracked 159 species of butterflies at 10 locations. It's one of the best compilations of data on how any species has reacted to environmental changes in recent decades, says Gary Langham, lead scientist in California for the National Audubon Society, a conservation group.
A separate study published in September in Biology Letters said climate change was one possible explanation for a sharp decline in female monarch butterflies in the eastern United States and Mexico. British researchers have tracked a decline in several species of butterflies since the 1960s.
"What's happening to butterflies is an indication of what's happening, and what could happen, to many different kinds of plants and animals," Langham says. "It underscores the importance of protecting habitats." 


Could chicken manure help curb climate change?; 'Biochar' is seen as cheap solution





WARDENSVILLE, W.Va. -- Here's a low-cost solution to global warming: chicken manure.
At Josh Frye's poultry farm in West Virginia, the chicken waste is fed into a large, experimental incinerating machine. Out comes a charcoal-like substance known as "biochar" -- which is not only an excellent fertilizer, but also helps keep carbon in the soil instead of letting it escape into the atmosphere, where it acts as a greenhouse gas.
Former vice president and environmental advocate Al Gore calls biochar "one of the most exciting new strategies" available to stop climate change. For Frye, it means that, before long, "the chicken poop could be worth more than the chickens themselves."
"I thought it was crazy at first, and my wife still thinks it's nuts," admits Frye, 44. Yet he has sold nearly $1,000 worth of biochar to farmers as far away as New Jersey, and plans to sell much more as he refines production. Venture capitalists, soil scientists and even members of Congress have all come to Frye's farm to see whether his example can be repeated.
Techniques such as biochar may represent the best compromise between what's good for the environment, and what's affordable during the recession, says Rep. Shelley Moore Capito, R-W.Va., who visited Frye's farm in August. As political support in Washington fades for more expensive pollution-fighting measures, such relatively cheap green technology may represent the immediate future of the environmental movement, analysts say.
The strategies range from the simple, such as putting carbon dioxide filters on top of smokestacks, to the controversial, such as a recent United Nations proposal to give out more free condoms -- which would in turn slow population growth, leading to fewer greenhouse gas emissions that are causing the planet to warm, the U.N. says.
Taken together, a "portfolio" of low-cost initiatives could have a meaningful, positive impact on the environment, says Jae Edmonds, a prominent climate change scientist at the University of Maryland.
More ambitious plans have stalled recently, including "cap and trade" legislation in the Senate that would set a national limit on greenhouse gas emissions and force companies to buy and sell permits to emit carbon dioxide. December's 193-nation environmental summit in Copenhagen failed to produce a binding treaty to cut global pollution.
"You have to make do with what you've got," Edmonds says. "If these other proposals are being deferred, then in the years ahead, we need to embrace these low-cost technologies that can get people excited ... because every little bit helps."
Biochar is typical of the promise -- and potential pratfalls -- of such technologies. Scientists are still trying to determine how much of an impact biochar can really make in reducing pollution.
In recent years, some promising ideas have either fallen short of expectations or had unintended negative consequences.
For example, the widespread use of corn ethanol as an additive to gasoline has caused U.S. food prices to rise sharply while reducing greenhouse gas emissions from vehicles by less than 1% a year, according to a report published last year by the Congressional Budget Office.
Timothy LaSalle, CEO of the Rodale Institute, a Pennsylvania-based non-profit group that advocates organic farming, says recent research indicates that a widespread shift to organic farming and other changes in how rural land is managed would trap such a large amount of carbon in the ground that they essentially could cancel out all carbon emissions from man-made sources, such as power plants.
LaSalle's predictions have bothered some scientists and environmental activists who accuse him of being too optimistic. LaSalle says he recently received a phone call from one of Gore's assistants challenging his findings. (Kalee Kreider, a Gore spokeswoman, had no comment.)
"I understand that scientists need to be conservative, but what we need right now are the outliers and extreme innovators to step forward and help solve this problem," LaSalle says. "We've got to clean up this atmosphere as fast as we can."
Seeing dollar signs
As with many new green initiatives, Frye's began with one main objective -- money.
"I always thought, 'Wouldn't it be nice to burn all this manure and use the heat to warm the chicken houses?' " he recalls. Frye's farm produces up to 800,000 chickens a year, and hatchlings need to be kept at a steady temperature of about 90 degrees, resulting in about $30,000 a year in propane costs.
Research led Frye to an Illinois-based company, Coaltec Energy, which produces gasifiers for agricultural use. To afford the machine's approximately $1 million cost, Frye applied for grants and low-interest loans from the Natural Resources Conservation Service, a federal agency that aids soil and water protection efforts, plus the West Virginia Department of Agriculture and other state agencies.
The machine looks like something out of a Dr. Seuss book. Ladders and tubes stick out from seemingly everywhere, and Frye has spent the past three years figuring out the best way to use it.
What makes the machine special is its ability to heat the manure in an extremely low-oxygen environment -- a process that produces no smoke and no smell.
Some of the resulting heat is, in turn, funneled into one of Frye's chicken houses, where it helps keep his hatchlings warm.
It's the byproduct of the process -- the biochar -- that has environmentalists most excited, and has Frye seeing dollar signs.
Biochar can be produced from several sources including wood and switchgrass, and it was first used in agriculture several centuries ago by Amazon Indians. Only recently have scientists begun to fully appreciate its impact on the environment, says Johannes Lehmann, a soil scientist at Cornell University.
Because biochar contains high levels of carbon, the element contained in all living things, it often serves as a very effective organic fertilizer, Lehmann says. That, in turn, produces healthier plants which, through photosynthesis, suck more carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere.
Another aspect of biochar may be even more beneficial. Under normal circumstances, the carbon in waste material -- a leaf that falls to the forest floor, for example -- decays naturally, releasing carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
But Lehmann says the carbon in biochar is particularly resistant to that conversion, so it stays "locked into" the soil much longer than other, unprocessed substances -- as long as 1,000 years in some cases.
"That's the key," Lehmann says. "Through this process, you're taking carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere." He says that even a relatively small-scale effort using such methods "could make a significant dent in emissions on a global level."
How much of a 'gamble'?
Lehmann says he and other researchers are still exploring which kinds of material make the best biochar, and how effectively it works in certain soils. He calls Frye a "front-runner" in poultry biochar, and says other producers may follow his example.
Meanwhile, Frye is working on increasing the carbon content of his biochar, which would make it more valuable. He frequently mails samples to scientists for analysis. When he wants to gauge the quality right away, he admits with a smile that he puts a little char in his mouth. ("If it's pasty and hard to swallow, then it's impure," Frye says.)
When Frye's machine operates at full capacity, it churns out as much as 9,000 pounds of biochar per day.
Based on his contacts with businesses, Frye says he can sell high-quality biochar for $1 a pound. "There's big-time people ... looking at this," he says.
That gold-rush mentality has given some people pause. LaSalle, the organic farming advocate, fears biochar has become overhyped, cautioning "there is too much venture capital involved."
Pat Mooney, director of ETC Group, a Canadian environmental organization, describes biochar as a "gamble."
"It becomes an excuse for others to say: 'Hey, don't worry, we don't have to cut back on greenhouse gas emissions.' And that's just not true," Mooney says.
Even Mike McGolden, president of the company that sold Frye his gasifier, is cautious.
He says Frye's experimentation has paved the way for larger-scale producers, including a dairy farm and chicken egg-laying operations in the Chesapeake Bay area, to acquire similar technology. He says it's still unclear whether the technology will prove viable for other small-scale farmers.
Still, Moore Capito, the congresswoman, says she was "very excited" by Frye's operation during her recent tour of homegrown green initiatives in her home state, which included solar and wind farms.
"In the long run, these things might take a little longer (than cap and trade) to produce positive results, but then again they might not. We just don't know," Moore Capito says.
For Frye, it's a win-win.
"This started as a way for me to make savings," he says. "But if it's good for me, and it's good for the planet too, hey, you sure can't beat that." 





Et cetera; Smart insights on the news of the day




National Review, editorial: "In committing $8.3 billion worth of federal loan guarantees to the construction of two new nuclear units ... (President Obama)  has sent a clear message ... that nuclear will be part of the country's future energy mix. For that message, he deserves our approbation. However, (the  loan guarantees are) an illustration of ... why we have not had a new nuclear plant in the United States for 30 years. The permitting process ... is longer ... than in most of the rest of the world. ... Construction also takes a long time. ... As a result, the nuclear industry is completely dependent on governmental approval, something that has turned it into yet another rent-seeking concern, latching on to the global warming bandwagon as its justification rather than the production of affordable, reliable, sustainable energy. In essence, the industry has happily become a ward of the state. This is not something conservatives should celebrate."
David Leonhardt, column, The New York Times: "Imagine if, one year ago, Congress had passed a stimulus bill that really worked. Let's say this bill had started spending money within a matter of weeks and had rapidly helped the economy. Let's also imagine it was large enough to have had a huge impact on jobs -- employing something like 2 million people who would otherwise be unemployed right now. If that had happened, what would the economy look like today? Well, it would look almost exactly as it does now. Because those nice descriptions of the stimulus that I just gave aren't hypothetical. They are descriptions of the actual bill." 



New study: Fewer but fiercer tropical cyclones; 87-a-year average could drop to 57 by the year 2100





Although global warming could cause the number of tropical cyclones to decrease around the world by the end of the century, the storms that do form probably will be more intense,  a study in the journal Nature Geoscience finds.
"Tropical cyclones" is an umbrella term that encompasses all tropical storms, hurricanes, typhoons and cyclones.
The study's authors, led by Thomas  Knutson of the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory in Princeton, N.J., base their findings on an analysis of past storm data as well as computer models that project future storm activity out to the year 2100.
Based on the analysis, Knutson says, the number of tropical cyclones around the world can be expected to decrease 6% to 34% by the end of the century. On average, about 87 tropical cyclones form each year globally. So by 2100, there could be as few as 57 storms each year.
But just as the overall numbers decrease, the study finds that the intensity of the strongest storms is forecast to increase,  from 2% to 11%, by the end of the century.
Why the decrease in overall storms yet an increase in stronger storms? Although the study does not address that, Knutson cites one  of his studies in the journal Science in January that found that increased wind shear in a warmer world could tear apart developing Atlantic hurricanes, which would decrease the overall number that form. But the study theorized that those storms that do survive the wind-shear weeding-out process would gain in strength because of warmer sea-surface temperatures.
Nature Geoscience study co-author Christopher Landsea of the National Hurricane Center in Miami, who has been skeptical of a link between global warming and hurricane activity, calls the research "very useful. It brings together different folks with different beliefs."
Landsea says the potential increase in strong hurricanes is "pretty tiny. We're not looking at any drastic increase by 2100."  For example, he says, a 150-mph hurricane might increase only to a 157-mph hurricane. "In my perspective, that's a little change, a long ways in the future."
He says the focus should be more on societal effects of hurricanes. He notes that damage costs for each hurricane are doubling in the USA every 10 to 15 years: "Societal changes are much more important than the changes due to global warming." 

Et cetera; Smart insights on the news of the day




Joel Kotkin, column, The Daily Beast: "(Today's) Democratic meltdown has less to do with belated admiration for the GOP ...  than with the massive disconnect between the people in power and the large, middle-class majority.   ... Ultimately, the party that wins in 2010 and beyond will be the one that addresses the real issues of this age -- the battle for private-sector jobs and upward mobility -- that matter to the vast majority of Americans. It is on those issues -- not global warming, ethnic purity, or gay marriage -- that the political future will now turn."
David Ropeik, column, The Atlantic: "Arguments over whether climate change is real, and the lack of a sense of personal danger even among the majority that agrees that it is, produce a public ambivalent about the danger. As a result, the social will to act remains weak, which means that the political risk for government leaders to take comprehensive action remains high. Meeting the challenge of climate change, then, will require an understanding not just of the physical climate of the earth, but also of the psychological climate of our perceptions."
James C. Capretta, blog, National Review Online: "The president's staff ...  put together a package of public insurance expansions and other changes that would cost roughly one-fourth of the 'big bill' while still covering some 15 million more people with health insurance. ... The very existence of the Obama team's fallback plan should embolden those Democrats who are now resisting their leadership's pressure to take up the full Obamacare package in coming weeks and pass it. ... It's not 'all or nothing,' and never has been. If Obamacare were to be set aside ...  the president and Congress would still have plenty of time (to)  pass a less ambitious but still significant measure." 

Is the GLOBAL WARMING movment COOLING?; Leaked e-mails, punctured arguments lead to closer scrutiny of climate science





STATE COLLEGE, Pa. -- The violent threats are not what bother Michael Mann the most. He's used to them.
Instead, it's the fact that his life's work -- the effort to stop global warming -- has been under siege since last fall. That's when Mann suddenly found himself in the middle of the "Climategate" scandal, in which more than 1,000 e-mails among top climate scientists -- including Mann -- were obtained illegally by hackers and published on the Internet.
The e-mails showed some of the scientists sharing doubts about just how fast the Earth's temperature is rising, questioning the work of other researchers and refusing to share data with the public. Critics, including Sen. James Inhofe, R-Okla., have seized on the e-mails as proof that Mann and his colleagues deliberately exaggerated the scientific case behind global warming.
In a rare extended interview, Mann acknowledges "minor" errors but says he has been bewildered by the criticism -- including a deluge of correspondence sent to his Pennsylvania State University office that, he says, occasionally has turned ugly.
"I've developed a thick skin," Mann says. "Frankly, I'm more worried that these people are succeeding in creating doubt in the minds of the public, when there really shouldn't be any."
Indeed, the controversy has contributed to a fundamental shift in efforts to stop global warming, forcing environmentalists to scale down long-held ambitions and try to win back an increasingly skeptical American public. Walter Russell Mead of the Council on Foreign Relations, a New York-based think tank, says recent events may be causing "the death of the global warming movement as we know it."
Others don't go quite that far, but there have been setbacks:
*Citing doubts raised by the Climategate e-mails, state governments in Texas, Virginia and Alabama filed legal challenges  last month to stop the federal government from regulating carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas. The challenges could force the Obama administration to modify or abandon its plans to regulate carbon emissions from factories and vehicles.
*Senate Democrats including John Kerry of Massachusetts have set aside House legislation that would limit greenhouse gas emissions from factories and other businesses nationwide. They are pursuing a new bill that may instead focus on utility companies, Kerry says.
*After more than a decade of fruitless efforts to negotiate a binding global treaty to cut greenhouse gas emissions, culminating in last December's summit in Copenhagen, the USA may now pursue a more narrow strategy, State Department climate change envoy Todd Stern said last month. He said future talks might be limited to a smaller group of major polluters such as the USA and China -- and leave out small countries that blocked a deal at Copenhagen, such as Sudan.
*The United Nations announced Wednesday that it will bring in an outside panel of scientists to help review an occasional study put together by a U.N. body, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). The study was regarded as the gold standard of climate science until several errors came to light this year.
It has been a dramatic reversal of fortune for a movement that, just a few years ago, thought it was "invincible," says Leighton Steward, a geologist and global warming skeptic. "We've all been kind of giggling as we watch this thing fall apart," he says.
An inconvenient error
In Mann's office at Penn State, the most prominently displayed object is a framed certificate from the IPCC thanking him for his contribution to the Nobel Peace Prize, which the body shared with former vice president Al Gore in 2007.
Mann's research, which used tree rings, coral and other historical indicators to estimate how temperatures have risen in recent centuries, has been used by the IPCC in its reports.
Mann's work also was featured in Gore's 2006 book, An Inconvenient Truth, which accompanied the documentary film of the same name.
In retrospect, Mann says the movie contributed to a "premature elation" among some scientists that they had won the battle for public opinion on global warming. He also says his colleagues and policymakers were too eager to present certain scientific conclusions as "settled" -- particularly with regard to possible consequences from climate change, which he says need further study.
In the most notorious error, the IPCC report said global warming could cause glaciers in the Himalayas to melt by 2035. The purportedly impending disaster was cited repeatedly by environmental groups and politicians at the Copenhagen summit -- including Bangladesh's environment minister, Hassan Mamud -- as a reason to take urgent action.
About a month after the summit concluded, the IPCC admitted the date was incorrect. It said the information was improperly taken from a report by an outside environmental group, the World Wildlife Fund, and not subjected to usual standards of vigorous scrutiny by other scientists.
Despite the mistakes, Mann says the core argument -- that the Earth is warming, humans are at least partly responsible, and disaster may await unless action is taken -- remains intact.
"I look at it like this: Let's say that you're in your car, you open up the owner's manual, and you discover a typo on page 225. Does that mean you stop driving the car? Of course not. Those are the kind of errors we're talking about here," Mann says. "Nothing has fundamentally changed."
Growing public skepticism
On that point, the Obama administration agrees with him. So do most governments around the world.
Carol Browner, the White House's director on climate and energy policy, says there are "thousands and thousands" of scientists whose work provides evidence of global warming. She told USA TODAY that, based on her frequent visits to Capitol Hill, recent questions over science have not changed a single vote in Congress on climate change legislation.
"It's easy to misuse these isolated reports of problems to suggest that the science behind global warming is somehow wrong," Browner says.
However, even the White House has tried to respond to rising public doubts. During his State of the Union Address in January, Obama called for Congress to support climate change legislation for job-creation purposes "even if you doubt the evidence."
Several polls indicate that the setbacks have contributed to a growing skepticism of climate science in the USA. In a national poll of 1,000 likely voters released last month by Rasmussen Reports, just 35% of respondents said they believed human activity is primarily responsible for global warming, down from 47% in April 2008.
Mead says the backlash has been especially strong because many politicians in the USA and elsewhere had said the content of the IPCC report was "unequivocal" and used it to support legislation that could dramatically alter the way the world produces and consumes energy.
"The fundamental problem is that these scientists are asking people to change the way the entire world's economy works based on what they're telling us. If you're going to do that, you had better come to the table with a certain amount of competence," Mead says.
Tim Wirth, a former U.S. senator who is now president of the United Nations Foundation, defends the IPCC, stating it has an annual budget of "only" about $3 million and relies almost entirely on volunteers to produce and fact-check its content.
Wirth says the organization would be aided by adding more scientists to its full-time staff. He also criticizes what he called "K Street (Washington) PR firms ... who are hired to examine every (detail) of the IPCC report and find problems and then get them out into the public domain."
"It's not a fair fight," Wirth says. "The IPCC is just a tiny secretariat next to this giant denier machine."
Mann says the controversy will probably result in "closer scrutiny of what scientists do. As long as that's done in good faith, that's a positive."
Dispute among scientists
Others say the long-term damage to the movement will be more substantial.
Inhofe says public opinion is shifting so dramatically that even the scaled-down climate legislation proposed by Kerry and others will not pass Congress.
"People are waking up to how all these scandals have shot holes through the global warming propaganda," says Inhofe, one of Congress' most vocal critics of climate change science.
Inhofe's Senate website lists more than 700 scientists who disagree with the IPCC report. Many of them agree that the Earth is warming but argue that other factors, such as solar flares or ocean temperatures, play a bigger role than human activity.
Browner and Obama have said the EPA may try to regulate carbon emissions if legislation fails.
Yet Inhofe says energy companies and others may use the scientific controversies as a basis for legal action to try to stop such efforts.
Meanwhile, the stalemate has allowed countries such as China to race ahead of the USA in clean technology and other "green" sectors, says Stern, the State Department envoy.
"They've passed us," Stern says. He notes that more than 100 nations have signed the non-binding deal to cut emissions that came out of Copenhagen, signaling intent to take the threat from global warming seriously.
Browner says the White House will keep trying to marshal support for climate legislation because of its importance to job creation and national security. She says Obama's recent decision to provide more than $8 billion in federal loan guarantees for nuclear power plants was aimed partly at winning over moderate legislators in Congress.
Asked about politics, Mann shrugs.
He says he has been exasperated by the way some politicians, including Inhofe, have portrayed this winter's snowstorms on the East Coast as undermining the case for global warming, while largely ignoring a recent announcement from NASA that the previous decade was the warmest on record.
Citing climate data, Mann says, "there's a better than 50-50 chance" that 2010 will be the hottest year ever. That, more than any political statement, could refocus the debate, he says.
"If we don't act on this, it's not a failure of science," Mann says. "It's our failure as a civilization to deal with the problem." 




Broad strategy needed for global climate treaty




It's unfortunate that fear of partisanship is tearing apart much needed reform in many areas of U.S. politics and governing. One area in particular, aside from health care, is that of climate legislation ("Is the global warming movement cooling?," Cover story, News, Thursday).
To "pursue a more narrow strategy" by removing international adaptation funding, or any language that addresses the needs of the smaller developing countries, would only further delay efforts toward establishing a global climate treaty. We need to stop focusing on the discrepancies of science and listen to what our international community is telling us.
Climate change is happening more rapidly, and more severely, and it's hitting already vulnerable areas first, diminishing crops, water resources and lives. The science isn't on paper; it's on the ground.
Until we can accept that this is an international issue, annual climate summits will continue to be a waste of time.
Lili Polastri
San Francisco
Not qualified to debate
Penn State professor Michael Mann equates a typo in an owner's manual to erroneous data in a report stating that the Himalayan glaciers are going to melt. And he wonders why he and his colleagues have skeptics.
This sort of bewilderment might be difficult for the uninitiated to recognize, but not for those of us perilously familiar with academic arrogance and the related ethical lapses.
Global warming is now a problem for another bunch to debate,  in a new context. This group's dishonest collaboration has disqualified them.
Tom Finn
St. Simons Island, Ga.
Follow the money
The errors still defended by climate scientist  Michael Mann, and others, are hardly comparable to simple typos in a car's  manual. At its most innocuous, that book would have mistakes  significant enough to misdirect the reader and render the car inoperable by way of instruction.
Overt demands for social justice, pushed by the United Nations and less industrialized countries, have made the real intention very clear: The global warming/climate change context is about defining who makes money and who pays, all by force of law. If you're an ordinary American consumer, then consider yourself a target. An informed individual would be naive to believe anything else, as good information is now widely available despite the lack of  news coverage.
The mainstream media have already been outflanked by others exposing the heavily vested interests in scientific, corporate, financial and political circles.  I suggest  USA TODAY follow the money, then let us common folks know what it finds.
David H. Walker
Ardmore, Ala. 

Poll: Worries about environment hit low





Americans' worries about environmental issues have hit a 20-year low, largely because of economic concerns, according to a Gallup Poll released Tuesday.
Fewer adults worry "a great deal" about each of eight issues surveyed, including global warming, than a year ago, according to the poll of 1,014 Americans taken March 4-7. Their concerns about six of the issues hit record lows.
At the same time, in findings Gallup will release later this week, a record number -- 53% -- say economic growth takes precedence, even if it hurts the environment, says Frank Newport, Gallup's editor in chief.
"The economy is swamping everything," Newport says. Also, questions about the science of global warming are affecting other issues, he says. "The whole environmental realm has been politicized."
Oil and gas companies have spent millions of dollars on ads to oppose a bill in the Senate that would reduce greenhouse gas emissions, says Bob Deans of the Natural Resources Defense Council.
"That does have an impact" on public opinion, Deans says. He's not surprised by the findings, given unemployment and foreclosures. "People have a lot on their worry plate."
Still, he says, other surveys show that people want Congress to tackle global warming, so he doesn't expect Gallup's poll to make the bill a harder sell.
The poll numbers are disappointing, but they "don't capture what motivates environmental legislation," which is "intensity," says Ken Cook, president of the Environmental Working Group, which promotes clean air and water policies.
The Gallup Poll finds that of eight environmental issues, Americans worry least about global warming and most about drinking-water pollution.
Even so, it cites record lows of 50% in the share of those who worry "a great deal" about drinking-water pollution, 33% on the loss of tropical rain forests, 31% on the extinction of plant and animal species. The poll finds lower concerns on three other issues:
*Waterways pollution, 46% are concerned today, down from 72% in 1989.
*Toxic waste contamination of air and water, 44% now, 69% in 1989.
*Air pollution, 38% today, 63% in 1989.
Global warming concerns have fallen dramatically since 2007, when 41% worried "a great deal" about the issue; 28% worry today.
Gallup's findings, based on land-line and cellphone interviews, have a margin of error of +/-4 percentage points. 



Global warming uses faulty data




USA TODAY's article on climate change was somewhat one-sided. It did not include critical facts that show not just sloppy science, but also efforts to cook the books by the global warming believers ("Is the global warming movement cooling?," Cover story, News, March 11).
Last year was described as the second warmest year on record, according to a NASA analysis. Michael Mann states that 2010 could be the warmest year in history.
Yet, when we look at the records for a report that found urbanization had a negligible effect on the collection of warming data, we find that information about the location of  nearly 50 weather measuring stations is missing.  Without the detailed histories, the study's findings are flawed.
The former director of the University of East Anglia's Climatic Research Unit, Phil Jones, conceded the possibility that the world was even warmer in medieval times. He also stated that for the past 15 years, there has been no "statistically significant" global warming.
The problem is that these scientists are so tied to their climate models that they refuse to acknowledge reality as measured by their instruments. This is not, as Mann states, a typographical error on page 225 of your car owner's manual. It is the wrong manual for the car.
Raymond D. Trombino
Retired lieutenant colonel
U.S. Air Force; Green Valley, Ariz.
Drug war violence
Am I supposed to feel sympathy for hunters who are unable to pursue their "sport" of perpetrating violence on non-humans because of rising human violence in northern Mexico? I can't say that's anything near what I felt while reading the article "Drug war in Mexico shoots down hunting" (News, Monday).
Instead, I felt a sense of relief for Mexico's wildlife in these affected areas. Perhaps a consequence of the drug war skirmishes will be that some of Mexico's prey animals can enjoy time out of the cross hairs for a while, and with it some peace and longevity.
Violence is violence, whether the target victim is human or non-human, and whether it is perpetrated during the pursuit of criminal activity or during a legal hunt.
Lynda Hardman
Yellow Springs, Ohio 



It'll be lights out for many on Saturday for Earth Hour





Millions of U.S. homes, 2,200 businesses such as Walgreens and 45 national landmarks including Seattle's Space Needle will go dark for an hour Saturday night to draw attention to global warming.
Despite debate over the science of climate change, a record number of U.S. cities, states and businesses have pledged to participate in this year's Earth Hour, in which non-essential lights go off at 8:30 p.m. local time, according to organizers.
"It reflects the conviction of people around the world that climate change is real and we need to do something about it," says Carter Roberts, chief executive officer of the World Wildlife Fund, which started Earth Hour in Australia in 2007.
The annual event has taken off since then. Last year, the group says, 4,000 cities turned off lights in official buildings in 87 countries, including 318 U.S. cities. It estimates 80 million Americans participated.
This year, 30 states (up from eight last year) plan to flip the light switch in governors' mansions and other public buildings. Among monuments and other landmarks taking part: the Empire State Building, the Las Vegas Strip, Niagara Falls and the Willis Tower, formerly the Sears Tower, in Chicago.
"As stewards of our national parks, we want to be visible leaders," says Navnit Singh of South Dakota's Mount Rushmore National Memorial, participating for the first time.
Beginning Saturday, he says, the memorial will illuminate the mountain, in which the facial profiles of four presidents are carved, for only an hour a day in a bid to reduce energy use 60%. He says climate change has severely affected South Dakota's Black Hills by increasing the number of mountain pine beetles, which have attacked 330,000 acres of ponderosa pine forest.
In Atlanta, where more than 650 public and private buildings will go dark, there will be a daytime festival to teach kids about Earth Hour and an evening dancing-in-the-dark party at the Savannah College of Art and Design, says Mandy Mahoney, the city's director of sustainability.
Earth Hour has its critics.
"Environmental challenges will not be solved by turning off our lights and symbolically hiding in the dark," says Michelle Minton of the Competitive Enterprise Institute, a Washington-based non-profit organization that promotes policies of free markets and limited government.
"We should be looking to technology and innovation to help solve environmental problems," she says. She'll attend her group's "Human Achievement Hour" cocktail party at 8:30 Saturday night to celebrate breakthrough products such as the compact fluorescent light bulb.
Roberts says he and his family will have a "candlelight" dinner and discuss how they can save energy. He's looking to insulate his house better and drive his car less. "For me," he says, "it means biking far more than I do now." 

Yes, drill offshore for oil, and do many other things, too




In 2008, candidate Barack Obama dismissed offshore drilling for oil and gas as a bad idea that would "only worsen our addiction to oil and put off needed investments in clean, renewable energy." That was the summer of $4 gas, though, when Americans were frantic to do something, and Obama eventually gave grudging support to a bipartisan plan that included drilling.
On Wednesday he shifted even more dramatically, proposing a robust plan to open up long-closed stretches of ocean off the East Coast and northern Alaska for drilling. Maybe it was just practical politics -- do something for the drill-baby-drill crowd and it'll be easier to get support for broader climate-change legislation that includes proposals Democrats and environmentalists like.
But it's also true that when you're in charge of making the country work, it becomes clear pretty quickly that it's foolish to put any reasonable energy source, or energy savings, off limits. That's certainly the way Obama has been acting lately.
During the campaign he was cool toward nuclear energy, but in February he announced billions in loan guarantees for the first nuclear plants to be built in 30 years. His stimulus bill contained billions for alternative energy projects, and on Thursday, his administration announced it was setting aggressive new targets for automotive fuel economy -- a goal of 35.5 miles per gallon by 2016, up sharply from 27.5 mpg now.
Good, good and good. There are critics of every one of these plans, but the nation doesn't have the luxury of instantly wishing away its dependence on oil, or forgoing the big, nuclear-powered plants that will provide electricity if all-electric cars or plug-in hybrids one day fill the nation's highways. We should move just as aggressively to make alternative energy such as wind and solar more than the 4% of our energy mix it is now. Conservation holds even more potential. We need to do everything.
That's especially true of drilling offshore for oil and gas. The math alone makes a compelling case. U.S. oil production peaked in late 1970 and has fallen 45% since then. U.S. consumption has fallen, too, but not nearly as much. To fill the gap, we now get almost 60% of our crude oil from a volatile world market, vs. 13% in 1970.
Critics note that the potential supplies offshore are a tiny part of the world market, but even so the Interior Department's estimates range from 39 billion to 62 billion barrels of oil. We use 7 billion barrels a year, so if the oil is really there, it could be five to nine years worth. True, robust production wouldn't kick in for a decade or more. But that same argument helped block action 10 years ago. Domestic gas supplies, meanwhile, are massive and underutilized.
Some of the most ironic objections come from those who say offshore exploration will destroy beaches and coastlines, citing the devastating 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill in Alaska as an example. The last serious spill from a drilling accident in U.S. waters was in 1969, off Santa Barbara, Calif. But tankers like the Valdez continue to carry the imported oil we're ruinously addicted to and have gone aground more frequently, more recently and far more disastrously.
It's been almost two years since $4-a-gallon gasoline shocked U.S. drivers and upset the U.S. economy. Predictably, prices fell, the crisis eased, and almost nothing was done to protect the nation against another shock. By increasing efforts to try everything, including drilling, Obama has made a start. 

Clinton takes the Initiative




About 1,300 college students from 83 countries are expected to converge this weekend at the University of Miami to work toward solutions to global challenges such as climate change, poverty and human rights. They were invited by former president Bill Clinton, who five years ago founded the non-profit Clinton Global Initiative, aimed at engaging world leaders in public service. In 2008, he added Clinton Global Initiative University for college students.
He speaks with USA TODAY's Mary Beth
Marklein about the weekend activities.
Q: Why did you involve college students?
A: First, I thought it was important to give young people a chance to participate and get into the habit of this kind of work. Secondly, they have incredibly good ideas, and some are very, very sophisticated. They also understand how technology can be used to harness potential and solve problems at much lower cost. I think there's a stronger service ethic than ever before. When I was in Georgetown, the number of people who did community service was quite limited.
Q: Students involved in your initiative have developed more than 2,000 commitments, or action plans -- starting bike-sharing programs on campuses, establishing community gardens and improving schools and libraries worldwide. What happens this weekend?
A: Already this year we've had 950 new commitments. What happens is they come to Miami, they have these ideas, and we give them a chance to try to find the resources they need to fulfill them. A lot of these commitments get refined, new commitments get made, they match up with students from other schools, or attract new partners. Wal-Mart this year will grant awards to outstanding commitments.
Q: It sounds as if Haiti was high on the minds of many students this year.
A: The University of Miami generated more than 250 commitments, and many of them are related to Haiti, including bringing students from Haitian universities that were destroyed physically in the earthquake to make sure they can finish their educations on time. I expect some commitments to come out of a session we're going to have on human trafficking. Three students at Virginia Tech have partnered with religious groups to help a village construct a facility to generate more fresh eggs every day and improve nutrition.
Q: You're inviting about 80 college presidents to Miami, too. What message do you want to send to them?
A: That part of their leadership responsibility is to set the right tone for this. That they should be telling their students from the minute they walk in the door as freshmen that their institution is committed to citizen service, in their community and the city in which they're located, and the state and around the world. And that they should (encourage students to) see making an impact as an important part of their education, as something they should do for the rest of their lives. 

'Eaarth' author: Young people can save world





Bill McKibben lives near a burbling creek in the Green Mountains of Vermont. Yet even there, he sees a telltale sign of climate change -- a deep gash in the woods caused by a recent flood.
McKibben, longtime environmentalist and author of more than a dozen books, first warned about global warming (then called the "greenhouse effect") in 1989 in The End of Nature, which he says was largely philosophical.
In contrast, his new book, Eaarth: Making a Life on a Tough New Planet (Henry Holt), is a dire, frightening call to action. It talks about the planet melting, drying, acidifying, flooding and burning in heretofore unseen ways.
"The world hasn't ended, but the world as we know it has -- even if we don't quite know it yet. It's a different place. A different planet. It needs a new name." Since it's Earth-like, he says, let's call it "Eaarth."
McKibben, 50, sees a slight chance we could still save the planet.
"If we're very lucky and very committed," he writes, it may be possible in several decades to bring carbon dioxide levels, now nearly 390 parts per million, back to what climate scientist James Hansen says is the maximum safe level -- 350 parts per million.
That's why McKibben and a handful of students at Middlebury College, where he's a scholar in residence, started the grass-roots group 350.org last year to raise awareness and press for political action. "We're not going to solve climate change one household at a time," he says. "What we need is a law, national and international, that puts a cap on carbon and raises its price."
Such a bill, pushed by President Obama, is now pending in the U.S. Senate. McKibben says he understands why people don't want to believe in climate change: They're addicted to fossil fuels. To maintain that addiction, the oil and coal industries are spending a lot of money to spread "disinformation" about global warming, he says.
What gives him optimism is young people's  intrinsic understanding of the world's interconnectedness, fostered by Facebook and social networking.
"The Internet is the one wild card," he says, "that may work in our favor in bringing international change." 


Energy's costs meet the eyes; In the long run, the sight of wind turbines and oil slicks might serve a purpose: providing a conscience to American consumption.





When the Deepwater Horizon oil rig sank to the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico on April 22, 11 men were missing and a gushing well was emptying into the sea. It happened to be Earth Day.
A week later, Interior Secretary Ken Salazar announced federal approval for the nation's first offshore wind farm in Nantucket Sound near Hyannis, Mass., which will turn an aquatic area the size of Manhattan into an oceanic-industrial complex with 130 massive turbines reaching 440 feet into the sky. Both are reminders that all energy comes at a price.
Regardless of one's stance on the science of climate change -- either the extent or the cause -- there is no debate that we pay dearly for our energy. It costs us in barrels and kilowatt hours, and it costs us in human lives. The time has come for Americans to face head-on the unsightly ways and means of our energy sources and recognize the true cost of turning on our televisions and powering up our laptops. Wind turbines off the Cape Cod coast and oil on our southern shores mark the definitive end of the era in which our energy addiction can be satiated by sources that are out of sight and out of mind.
The toll around us
There are no easy choices here. Fossil fuels don't just drive our cars. They drive our economy and will for the indefinite future. But the social and environmental costs of mining, drilling and making batteries for our hybrid cars are not evenly distributed, either within or beyond our borders.
Because of geology and politics, those who benefit from cheap and abundant energy are often far removed from sources of production, whether the North Slope of Alaska or the former mountaintops of West Virginia, let alone the Middle East. It has been easy to ignore the fact that resource extraction, especially for fossil fuels, takes a devastating toll on human life -- miners buried and oil riggers lost at sea are just the latest deaths caused by our voracious quest for resources. The effects of climate change may seem abstract, but what we see in the reflective sheen of this oil spill is that our unquenchable thirst for the substance that lubricates our lives is killing us along with the ecosystems we inhabit.
In the Gulf of Mexico, however, we may have found our infinite fount. This deep-water accident has no horizon. It isn't an oil spill in the conventional sense, where a fixed amount of fuel escapes from the hull of a ship. When this rig sank, it left behind a severed umbilical cord that had tethered it to an oil borehole reaching deep into the earth's crust a mile below the waves. We have tapped into something we quite literally can't control.
All this is a perfect call-and-response to Sarah Palin's imprudent "Drill, baby, drill!" cheer. No one knows how or when the spill will end. We can only speculate about the extent of the damage to vast wetlands that produce three-quarters of the nation's shrimp -- habitat that humans, plants, animals and birds depend upon for livelihoods or lives.  BP's spill could become  the nation's greatest environmental catastrophe, dwarfing both Hurricane Katrina and Exxon Valdez. Already, the uncomfortable reality of energy's true cost is literally washing up on our shores.
Weeks ago, some of the migratory birds that are now whistling their mating songs in the idylls of Cape Cod might have passed over Chandeleur Islands off Louisiana, where the oil slick first made contact with land last Thursday. For nine years, many Cape Codders have viewed this issue from the late Sen. Ted Kennedy's perspective, arguing that despoiling their blue horizon is an unacceptable price to pay, even for clean energy.
Offshore oil rigs that dot our coasts from New Orleans  to Prudhoe Bay, Alaska, also mar the view, but if a wind farm fails, the disaster has begun and ended when the turbine topples into the sea. Wind, after all, doesn't leak.
Nor does turbulent air release the greenhouse gases that oil sends up when burned, either as slicks of crude are set ablaze to save our shorelines or when properly ignited in our internal combustion engines.
Thinking big
Energy conservation has to come first, as California Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger, leader of the nation's most energy-efficient state, acknowledged when he came out against offshore oil drilling this month. McKinsey & Co., one of the world's top consulting firms, reported last year that Americans will save twice what we invest in energy efficiency within 10 years.   But even if we are able to climb this slippery slope toward self-sacrifice, humans everywhere will continue to sop up energy from various sources. If the same mind power and engineering feats now being directed to capping the Gulf's unruly well could be channeled into a proactive renewable energy initiative worthy of the Manhattan Project or the Apollo Program, that would be a start. But no matter where our energy comes from in the future, ignorance is no longer an option.
We will all benefit from bringing the reality of energy costs closer to home -- out of our windows, atop our roofs. Putting energy production in front of our eyes could bring us closer to acknowledging our addiction, the first step to kicking any habit. When it comes to energy, seeing just might be believing.
Meera Subramanian is a freelance environmental journalist and senior editor for the online religion magazine Killing the Buddha. She is based in Brooklyn and can be found at www.meerasub.org. 


Reports' advice: Charge for carbon emissions; Congress must 'get real' about climate change





In three reports on global warming, the U.S. National Academy of Sciences called Wednesday for limiting greenhouse gas emissions by setting a price on them.
The three "America's Climate Choices" reports, requested by Congress during the Bush administration,  come as roiling debate over climate and energy legislation in Washington and the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico cloud future energy decisions.
"Together, these reports show that the state of climate change science is strong," NAS chief Ralph Cicerone says. "The data show the reality of climate change."
Echoing past reports such as those by the 2007 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, researchers in the new reports expressed confidence that average global atmosphere temperatures were about 1.4 degrees  warmer in this decade compared with a century ago and that future fossil-fuel emissions of greenhouse gases and related activities would increase temperatures anywhere from 2 to 11 additional degrees by 2100.
"The reports reinforce that we know enough, now, to take sensible actions to address climate change," says James Connaughton, former environment council chief for the Bush administration.
In wide-ranging recommendations, the studies call for better coordination of federal climate research efforts and for setting a price on carbon emitted from industrial smokestacks, either through a tax or in a carbon market proposed in a bill that was approved in the House but still debated in the Senate.
The report explicitly calls for cutting U.S. carbon emissions 50% to 80% from 1990 levels by 2050, in line with goals of both the Bush and Obama administrations.
"This is a wake-up call from science telling Congress to get real," says Alden Meyer of the Union of Concerned Scientists in Washington, D.C. "Wake up and smell the carbon."
This week, NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration independently reported that 2010 has been the warmest year so far recorded worldwide, despite a snowy winter in parts of the United States. At least six climate-related bills are in play in the Senate. Whether the academy reports will make the difference in those debates is unclear.
"The fundamental problems we have in climate are political in nature," says political scientist David Victor of the University of California-San Diego. "Scientists weighing in one more time aren't going to change things." 

'Merchants of Doubt' delves into contrarian scientists; Authors show same experts often oppose consensus views





Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of Scientists Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Global Warming
By Erik Conway and Naomi Oreskes
Bloomsbury Press, 368 pages, $27
---
No matter how overwhelmingly the scientific community may back a research study, naysayers can always find a scientist to support the opposing view on issues ranging from tobacco smoke to global warming.
According to science historians Naomi Oreskes and Erik Conway, the same contrarian scientists keep popping up no matter the topic: Fred Seitz, Fred Singer and Bill Nierenberg, to name three. All physicists, Seitz and Nierenberg worked on the atomic bomb, while Singer, a rocket scientist, worked on observation satellites.
Oreskes and Conway have co-authored a history of these Merchants of Doubt.  Their subjects have stood against the scientific consensus on a number of issues. They gained traction because a media concerned with fairness gave them equal time.
In 1953, a scientific study demonstrated that mice painted with cigarette tar developed fatal cancers. In December of that year, tobacco companies created the Tobacco Industry Research Committee (TIRC) to cast doubt on the link between tobacco and cancer. It worked. Between 1954 and the late 1970s, more than 100 lawsuits were filed against tobacco companies and not one plaintiff received money, the authors say.
In 1979, tobacco giant R.J. Reynolds hired Seitz, former president of the National Academy of Sciences, as a consultant. His credibility helped TIRC counter  research linking smoking with health problems. As one tobacco industry executive put it in an infamous memo, "Doubt is our product."
In 1993, the tobacco industry published Bad Science: A Resource Book, a handbook containing ideas for messages that could be used in sound bites to weaken scientific claims. Examples:
*Too often science is manipulated to fulfill a political agenda.
*Government agencies betray the public trust by violating principles of good science to achieve political goals.
*The Environmental Protection Agency adjusts science to support preconceived public policy prescriptions.
*Decisions based on bad science cost society heavily.
*EPA's tobacco reports allow political goals to guide research.
*Proposals that target tobacco smoke are an excuse for new laws to take individual liberties.
Writing about secondhand smoke, Singer once said, "If we do not carefully delineate the government's role in regulating (danger) ... there is essentially no limit to how much government can ultimately control our lives."
What Singer and Seitz did for tobacco, Nierenberg did for global warming. In 1995, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) concluded that human-caused climate change was a reality. By 2004, global warming was becoming the scientific consensus. The National Academy of Sciences commissioned a study, naming to the panel economists and scientists including Nierenberg. A committee Nierenberg chaired could not get the economists and scientists to agree, so the synthesis supported Nierenberg's economic argument.
The scientists had argued that a "wait-and-see" attitude was untenable, but Nierenberg discounted distant costs and ascribed the rise in temperature to the sun. Nierenberg's message carried, even though other scientists such as Bert Bolin called Nierenberg "simply wrong."
Eventually, most of the scientific community stopped working with Nierenberg, according to Oreskes and Conway.
Though a veteran of tobacco wars, Singer also joined the global warming fray. In an article on the topic, he said, "The scientific base for a greenhouse warming is too uncertain to justify drastic action at this time." He had voiced similar reservations about acid rain and ozone depletion.
The authors give examples of conservative think tanks supporting the status quo:
*The George C. Marshall Institute opposes the views of the Union of Concerned Scientists, an advocacy group for environmental solutions that included late astronomer Carl Sagan.
*The Competitive Enterprise Institute, which promotes free-market economics and minimal business regulation, dismisses research of Rachel Carson, author of Silent Spring, a book decrying overuse of the pesticide DDT.
*The Advancement of Sound Science Center promotes the idea that environmental science on issues such as smoking, pesticides and global warming is "junk science."
The center is operated by Steven Milloy, a self-described libertarian and columnist at FoxNews.com. Milloy once wrote an article blasting the Arctic Climate Impact Assessment, a report of the Union of Concern Scientists that explores the impact of a warming Arctic. At the time, it was not revealed that Milloy  got money from ExxonMobil.
All in all, Oreskes and Conway paint an unflattering picture of why some scientists continue to stand against the overwhelming scientific consensus on issues at the center of public discussion.
Brown is a freelance writer and author of Rhode Island Curiosities. 



Researchers exploring cloud whitening; Critics: Global warming idea is dangerous





Can whiter clouds slow global warming?
A grant from Bill Gates is helping researchers explore the possibility that making clouds whiter and more reflective by spraying them with a fine seawater mist could help block the sun's rays and send them back into space.
Cloud whitening builds on the natural cloud-forming process, says Silicon Valley inventor Armand Neukermans, who received the funding to test if the concept is doable.
When water vapor in cloud-forming regions encounters sea salt crystals it condenses around them, forming tiny droplets, he explains. Together, many droplets diffuse sunlight and make a cloud whiter.
Neukermans says he is working on a conceptual spray mechanism mounted on a fleet of boats in the ocean to lift fine sea salt crystals into the air to increase the number of droplets and the reflectivity in the clouds.
Proponents say the research is needed because of society's failure to reduce carbon dioxide emissions, which are thought to be causing global warming, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The 2000-09 decade was the warmest since record keeping began in 1880, NOAA reports.
"If the climate starts to change in some severe way you can reach for some of these things," Gates said Thursday. "At best it's an insurance policy."
Gates called the $300,000 grant "a tiny amount of money." He spoke Thursday at the Newseum in Washington about the need for more research on clean energy to reduce the threat of global warming.
Critics call the research dangerous.
"The assumption is we can play God with the Earth's ecosystem," says Erich Pica, president of Friends of the Earth.
The solution to global warming is to reduce fossil fuel use and carbon dioxide production, Pica says. "Everything else is just a distraction."
Gates has been studying technologies for reducing carbon dioxide emissions and geo-engineering techniques such as cloud whitening for several years, says Ken Caldeira of the Carnegie Institution for Science's Department of Global Ecology.
Caldeira and a colleague at the University of Calgary administer $4.5 million that Gates provided for such research. Caldeira awarded $300,000 of that money for laboratory research by a team of engineers led by Neukermans. Other researchers are looking for additional ways to whiten clouds, and at designs for unmanned boats to carry the spray mechanisms, says cloud physicist John Latham of the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo. Latham first suggested cloud whitening as a way to counter global warming in 1990, according to Rasch.
Latham envisions hundreds of wind-powered boats generating the sea spray and a combination of planes and satellites to measure and control the clouds' moisture content, reflected solar energy and surface temperature.
He estimates the project, which he says would require international approval before it were launched, would cost about $4.5 billion and buy the planet 30 to 60 years to develop a more permanent solution.
There are risks to spraying seawater into the air, says Dan Murphy, a research scientist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Earth System Research Laboratory in Boulder. Reducing the sunlight entering the ocean will reduce the evaporation of water and make less rainfall, which could lead to droughts, he says.
Such worries prompted the Montreal-based environmental group ETC Group to launch a campaign called "Hands off Mother Earth!" that counts dozens of member organizations around the world and urges governments to ban real-world geo-engineering trials.
Global warming was caused by "the scientific, corporate and political establishment of developed countries," ETC Group's Diana Bronson says.
"To now think those same people will correct the climate crisis and the biosphere is a little bit naive," Bronson says.
Kert Davies, research director for the environmental group Greenpeace, worries about unintended consequences but he can imagine a reasonable use for cloud whitening.
"In an emergency situation during summer when the ice cap is melting you might want to think about putting up a cloud," Davies says. "But as a global strategy it's just a Band-Aid." 


Filmmakers turn their lenses on failing schools; Documentaries personalize an epic problem





In 2006, An Inconvenient Truth shined a light on global warming, bringing images of collapsing ice sheets and drowning polar bears to multiplexes nationwide.
Could 2010 be the year moviegoers get the angry urban parent  demanding an end to teacher tenure?
This summer, no fewer than four documentaries, most of them independently produced, tackle essentially the same question: Why do so many urban public schools do such a bad job?
Among the new films:
*Teached, directed by activist and onetime Teach For America corps member Kelly Amis. It tackles tenure, bureaucracy and "anti-child work rules that permeate every school in America."
*The Cartel, directed by former TV news anchor and reporter Bob Bowdon. It takes on the "unconscionable failure" of New Jersey's public schools.
*The Lottery, an intimate look at four families' attempts to get children into an oversubscribed Harlem charter school.
*Waiting for Superman, the biggest and flashiest of the four, directed by Davis Guggenheim, who won an Oscar for ... An Inconvenient Truth.
Guggenheim's film, to be released this fall, casts the widest net, following five families as they search for better schools for their kids.  It illustrates the dysfunction of a system that seems to have lost sight of its most basic function: to educate everyone.
Yes, but school reform as compelling drama?
Perhaps. The narratives of both Superman and The Lottery build inevitably to nail-biting scenes of families pinning their hopes on a  drawing to determine who'll get a shot at their dream school.
For Madeleine Sackler, who directed The Lottery, the decision to explore school reform hit in 2008 after she happened upon a news report of New York City schoolchildren enduring a computerized drawing to determine who would get slots at Harlem Success Academy, a high-performing charter school.
Sackler, 27, says it's "a simple story about parents who want something and can't have it."
The film opened in New York and Los Angeles on June 11 and opens in select cities nationwide this summer.
Dennis Van Roekel, president of the National Education Association, says it may seem appealing to focus on just a few high-performing schools, but it's a "cop-out" to think this is a solution.
"It ought to be that no matter where you live, there's a great public school," he says. "It shouldn't be a lottery -- it should be right down the street."
Still, the question arises: Why are we seeing all these documentaries now?
Mike Petrilli  of the Thomas B. Fordham Institute, an education think tank in Washington, D.C., says school reform "has gone mainstream -- it's certainly politically mainstream now." The grass-roots push for better schools "fits into a larger American narrative about how small groups of people can change the world."
Guggenheim, who narrates Superman, slams public-school bureaucracies and unions and extols charter schools. But he notes in passing, "Only one in five charters is producing results" -- even though they're free from bureaucracy and union rules.
Superman might also be due for a few updates. For instance, using jittery, hand-shot cellphone footage, Guggenheim  goes inside New York City schools' infamous "rubber rooms," where teachers languish for months or years in paid limbo as they await due-process hearings over suspected misbehavior or poor performance. But he doesn't mention that the city and its teachers union agreed to abolish the rubber rooms in April.
Petrilli says he doubts that all the attention will bring education reform to the level of global warming, since for most moviegoers, underperforming public schools will remain "a poor people's issue."
But Sackler says just putting the families' stories in front of moviegoers will help the cause.
"Most people don't know what a charter school is," she says. "So at the very least, people will be more informed about the headlines." 



Filmmakers turn their lenses on failing schools; Documentaries personalize an epic problem





In 2006, An Inconvenient Truth shined a light on global warming, bringing images of collapsing ice sheets and drowning polar bears to multiplexes nationwide.
Could 2010 be the year moviegoers get the angry urban parent  demanding an end to teacher tenure?
This summer, no fewer than four documentaries, most of them independently produced, tackle essentially the same question: Why do so many urban public schools do such a bad job?
Among the new films:
*Teached, directed by activist and onetime Teach For America corps member Kelly Amis. It tackles tenure, bureaucracy and "anti-child work rules that permeate every school in America."
*The Cartel, directed by former TV news anchor and reporter Bob Bowdon. It takes on the "unconscionable failure" of New Jersey's public schools.
*The Lottery, an intimate look at four families' attempts to get children into an oversubscribed Harlem charter school.
*Waiting for Superman, the biggest and flashiest of the four, directed by Davis Guggenheim, who won an Oscar for ... An Inconvenient Truth.
Guggenheim's film, to be released this fall, casts the widest net, following five families as they search for better schools for their kids.  It illustrates the dysfunction of a system that seems to have lost sight of its most basic function: to educate everyone.
Yes, but school reform as compelling drama?
Perhaps. The narratives of both Superman and The Lottery build inevitably to nail-biting scenes of families pinning their hopes on a  drawing to determine who'll get a shot at their dream school.
For Madeleine Sackler, who directed The Lottery, the decision to explore school reform hit in 2008 after she happened upon a news report of New York City schoolchildren enduring a computerized drawing to determine who would get slots at Harlem Success Academy, a high-performing charter school.
Sackler, 27, says it's "a simple story about parents who want something and can't have it."
The film opened in New York and Los Angeles on June 11 and opens in select cities nationwide this summer.
Dennis Van Roekel, president of the National Education Association, says it may seem appealing to focus on just a few high-performing schools, but it's a "cop-out" to think this is a solution.
"It ought to be that no matter where you live, there's a great public school," he says. "It shouldn't be a lottery -- it should be right down the street."
Still, the question arises: Why are we seeing all these documentaries now?
Mike Petrilli  of the Thomas B. Fordham Institute, an education think tank in Washington, D.C.,
says school reform "has gone mainstream -- it's certainly politically mainstream now." The grass-roots push for better schools "fits into a larger American narrative about how small groups of people can change the world."
Guggenheim, who narrates Superman, slams public-school bureaucracies and unions and extols charter schools. But he notes in passing, "Only one in five charters is producing results" -- even though they're free from bureaucracy and union rules.
Superman might also be due for a few updates. For instance, using jittery, hand-shot cellphone footage, Guggenheim  goes inside New York City schools' infamous "rubber rooms," where teachers languish for months or years in paid limbo as they await due-process hearings over suspected misbehavior or poor performance. But he doesn't mention that the city and its teachers union agreed to abolish the rubber rooms in April.
Petrilli says he doubts that all the attention will bring education reform to the level of global warming, since for most moviegoers, underperforming public schools will remain "a poor people's issue."
But Sackler says just putting the families' stories in front of moviegoers will help the cause.
"Most people don't know what a charter school is," she says. "So at the very least, people will be more informed about the headlines." 

Probe clears scientists in 'Climategate'; No misconduct is found, but more openness urged





A final investigation of stolen e-mails that raised suspicions about the science behind global warming cleared scientists of any misconduct on Wednesday, but it called for researchers to be more open with their data.
"We find that their rigour and honesty as scientists are not in doubt," concludes the  report, headed by Muir Russell,  leader of Scotland's Judicial Appointments Board. The board added that the scientists did not "prejudice" recent international climate change panels.
The report findings echo two United Kingdom inquests released earlier, and a Penn State investigation unveiled last week that cleared a researcher, Michael Mann, of impropriety in the case, widely dubbed "Climategate" in news reports. All dealt with allegations about 1,073 e-mails hacked in November from the United Kingdom's University of East Anglia Climate Research Unit (CRU).
Most of the e-mails discussed averaging past temperature records, the central interest of the CRU team headed by climate researcher Phil Jones,  finding temperatures now significantly higher than in the past.
Some of the e-mails came under fire for appearing to dismiss those who questioned the global warming predictions and for discussing boycotts of journals publishing results that likewise questioned the science, sometimes in vivid ways. Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory's Ben Santer wrote in one that he was "tempted to beat the crap out of," climate researcher Patrick Michaels of the Cato Institute, a  libertarian think tank.
"Now that the e-mails have become public, some are doubtless regretted by their authors," the Russell report says. And it noted "a consistent pattern of failing to display the proper degree of openness" by the scientists and university in response to critics' data requests. But it finds, as have past reports, that others have independently arrived at results echoing the CRU research. The Russell report went  so far as to reproduce the CRU results with publicly available data.
In March, the U.S. National Research Council released three congressionally requested reports reconfirming that average global surface temperatures rose 1.4 degrees over the past century, with a likely rise between 2 degrees and 11.5 degrees by 2100, largely depending on greenhouse gas emissions.
"Overall, the report adds to the others showing the scientists haven't done anything wrong," says climate scientist Donald Wuebbles of the University of Illinois.  "How would you like to have 13 years of your e-mail stolen and picked over for everything unkind you've ever said?"
Michaels disagrees with the Russell report and others. "There's no way that science community is going to admit to any type of misconduct," he says.
However, "this is no whitewash," says science misconduct expert Daniele Fanelli of the United Kingdom's University of Edinburgh. "Implicitly, the report is saying something was wrong here, we need more transparency in the system of communicating the science." 

Energy bill to debut -- a shadow of itself; Proposed legislation retooled





WASHINGTON -- President Obama's attempt to use the Gulf of Mexico oil spill to help propel comprehensive energy legislation has failed, but the Senate plans to unveil a scaled-back measure as early as next week.
A month ago, Obama used his first Oval Office address to the nation to press for congressional action on energy and climate change legislation -- the only major piece of his domestic agenda that has languished in Congress.
Yet on Tuesday, the topic didn't even come up when the president met with the Senate's Democratic leaders at the White House to discuss upcoming legislation. Instead, the meeting focused on financial regulation, aid for the unemployed and increasing loans to small businesses.
The energy bill likely to emerge in the Senate won't look like the one Obama has sought since taking office. He wants to charge utilities and other companies for a portion of their greenhouse gas emissions as a way to reduce pollution and pay for clean energy alternatives.
"I'm not sure the votes are there to do that in this Congress," says Sen. Jeff Bingaman, D-N.M., chairman of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee. "You need to do whatever you're able to do when you're able to do it."
Revising the bill
Instead, the Senate bill is likely to include renewable energy standards and tax credits, tougher fuel-efficiency requirements, incentives for electric vehicles and new oil drilling regulations. The House of Representatives passed a more comprehensive bill, including a price on carbon pollution, last year.
White House spokesman Robert Gibbs said Tuesday that when the Senate takes up the bill, "I expect that the president will be active in that debate."
Since April's Gulf oil spill highlighted the nation's dependence on foreign oil and the dangers of domestic exploration, Obama has sought a deal on taxing carbon pollution -- something environmentalists say is essential but most industry officials oppose.
Obama told a bipartisan group of senators involved in energy policy late last month to aim high -- but not so high that they don't hit something, according to Democratic Sen. Tom Carper of Delaware, one of the participants.
The problem for Obama: victories on economic stimulus, financial regulation, health care and education have eaten up much of his mandate, leaving him less able to dictate terms. "There's only so much political capital to go around," says Jack Gerard, president of the American Petroleum Institute. "Every major battle consumes a certain amount."
"There's a little bit of legislative fatigue with expansive, huge bills," says Bruce Josten of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
Obama was able to do two things on energy last year: The $862 billion economic stimulus law included about $80 billion for renewable energy programs, and fuel-efficiency standards were raised for new cars and trucks.
At the same time, Obama has signaled he's willing to oppose environmentalists by promoting loan guarantees for nuclear plants, more offshore oil drilling and clean coal technology.
"The White House appears to be navigating the politics of climate and energy through the theory of unilateral disarmament," says Erich Pica of Friends of the Earth. "Who are they negotiating with?"
Navigating the opposition
White House senior adviser David Axelrod says the goal is to get a bill through a Senate where nearly all Republicans and some Democrats from manufacturing states -- such as Michigan's Carl Levin and Debbie Stabenow and Pennsylvania's Bob Casey and Arlen Specter -- oppose raising costs on industry. "We will take the steps that are possible and achievable," Axelrod says. "We're not going to make the perfect be the enemy of the good, but we want to make progress."
Some propelling factors:
*The Deepwater Horizon oil spill presented a crisis in need of a solution. "The tragedy unfolding on our coast is the most painful and powerful reminder yet that the time to embrace a clean energy future is now," Obama said in the June 15 Oval Office speech.
*He pledged to foreign leaders at last December's climate change summit in Copenhagen that the U.S. would reduce greenhouse gas emissions 17% by 2020, compared with 2005 levels, and 83% by 2050. "The White House has a real interest in getting this done for international reasons as well as for domestic ones," says Daniel Weiss of the Center for American Progress.
*Last year's 219-212 House vote left moderate Democrats hanging. They voted to put a price on carbon pollution, dubbed a "national energy tax" by Sen. Lamar Alexander, R-Tenn. The Senate hasn't acted. The National Republican Congressional Committee is targeting more than 50 Democrats over the vote, such as Reps. Baron Hill of Indiana, Patrick Murphy of Pennsylvania and Zack Space of Ohio.
*This would be Obama's best chance to enact anything close to comprehensive energy legislation if the midterm elections follow historical patterns and hand the GOP major gains in Congress.  After President Clinton failed to pass a health care bill in 1994, it took 16 years to get it done.
Says Tony Kreindler of the Environmental Defense Fund: "If we don't get it done this year, we're not coming back to it for a long, long time." 

Big decline seen in ocean plankton





Warming oceans have led plankton populations to typical declines of about 1% a year over the past century worldwide, a study  of hydrographical records suggested Wednesday. In the Nature journal study led by Daniel Boyce of Canada's Dalhousie University, a team compiled a half-million ocean transparency measurements made by ships since 1899 and found plankton declined in eight  of 10 ocean basins. Plankton grow near sea surfaces, providing nutrients for sea life and producing oxygen. Long-term improvements in ocean transparency indicating lowered plankton populations are "unequivocal," the study says. And the drop appears to have increased in recent decades. "It's a scary thing," says marine scientist David Siegel of the University of California-Santa Barbara. "Phytoplankton are the base of the food web, so this will affect marine life." Oxygen production, however, probably will not be affected by the drop, Siegel says. Ocean surfaces have warmed in recent decades -- a change driven by emissions of greenhouse gases, according to the 2007 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change reports -- interrupting the cycling of nutrients from the sea floor that help feed plankton.  -- Dan Vergano 

Afraid Social Security won't be there for you? It will.




At a time when it's increasingly common to see impending doom everywhere -- terrorism, global warming, joblessness, etc. -- here's something Americans can cross off their be-very-afraid list: whether Social Security will be around so they can worry about all those other threats in relative financial comfort.
It's true that last week's report on Social Security's long-term finances shows a program that's dipping into the red for the first time since Congress last fixed it in 1983. And it's true that the program's vaunted $2.6 trillion "trust fund," which would cover all costs until 2037, isn't terribly trustworthy because it's effectively full of bookkeeping entries and no cash.
But here are a few things to remember about perhaps the most popular of all government programs:
*Even if the trust fund is just IOUs, Social Security is still a moral and political obligation with few parallels in American society. It's no joke that it has been called the "third rail of American politics (touch it and die)," since any worker who has dutifully forked over the payroll tax every pay period for decades has every right to expect the government to live up to its end of the deal and provide retirement income when the time arrives. Woe unto politicians who try to renege. History shows they find a way not to.
*Social Security's problems are easily fixable. It's the politics that's hard. To come up with the money the government owes the trust fund, Washington has to economize elsewhere. It's used to doing the opposite: spending trust fund money to hide the deficit. A plan for payouts after 2037 is also needed. Washington has been debating ways to trim benefits and nudge up taxes for years. But members of Congress, wanting to stay popular, refuse to make choices. Result: stalemate. The one good thing about Social Security's balance sheet nearing the tipping point is that it should recreate the sense of urgency that saved the program in 1983. Then, like now, many young people didn't believe Social Security would be there for them, but leaders of both parties rescued the program by raising the retirement age in the distant future (now the present) and raising taxes. It was excruciatingly difficult then, and reaching agreement in these more polarized times will be even harder. But everyone knows how.
*There's no silver bullet, despite what privatizers preach about the magic of turning Social Security over to the markets. In fact, it's mystifying that anyone who watched his or her 401(k) stagnate with the stock market for the past decade would want to trade Americans' guaranteed retirement security for the unreliable mercies of the markets. What advocates of replacing Social Security with private accounts don't say is that their system might occasionally beat Social Security, but it depends heavily on when you retire.
People who retired in 1982 with nothing but a stock portfolio, for example, reached the end of their working life after 17 frustrating years of zero long-term gain in the market. The Dow Jones industrial average got within a few points of 1,000 in 1965, but it didn't break through 1,000 for good until late 1982. Meanwhile, inflation cut the buying power of a dollar to 34 cents.
Social Security is, among other things, the nation's most effective anti-poverty program, and  when the markets crash, the elderly shouldn't crash with them. Some modest tax increases and benefit trims are needed because so many Baby Boomers are retiring. But you can bet they'll happen, just because the other options are worse. 

Sure, we're all doomed. But we need not surrender.





I recently opened the newspaper and read a story that began, "A new superbug could spread around the world and scientists say there are almost no drugs to treat it."
Ah, top of the mornin' to you, too. But before I could get too depressed, my 6-year-old daughter screamed when her 5-year-old brother doused her with baking soda in an effort to turn her into a ghost. Then, their  2-year-old sister spun around naked in the kitchen singing, "Look at me; I am a ballerina." Needless to say, the daily chaos and joy -- it's a fine line -- pretty much ended whatever introspection an adult could enjoy.
Having procreated to bring these kids into this still-beautiful world, I do wonder just what we -- as a world community -- are doing to our planet. Between superbugs, global warming and compromised food supplies, I fret that our civilization might indeed be coming to an end.
Then there's hip hop music, competitive preschool (just say "no") and reality television, all of which also cause a minicrisis of confidence, but those are topics for another day.
Is fear legitimate?
Back to that news story and superbugs. Is fear of the world coming to a quick end legitimate, or is it more just a manifestation of our self-absorbed, self-important culture? And who really knows anyhow as one study seems to contradict the next?
I suppose the answer lies in your definition of "quick."
We inadvertently discovered this on a recent rainy weekend when we took the kids to the museum. I learned a few things, starting with that trying to educate one's own kids is overrated, especially in the summer.
The kids actually enjoyed the museum just fine. Who wouldn't love looking at large dinosaurs and pushing buttons to make weird stuff move?
But then we made the mistake of wandering through the "Evolving Planet" exhibit. All 4  billion years of it. And you thought Larry King was old.
Mass extinction
Now I knew in the great scheme of things that our time on this planet has been short, but I didn't know just how short. What struck me most in the exhibit was that there have already been five mass extinctions in our planet's history.  The culprit was usually climate change caused by a massive volcanic eruption or a meteor striking the Earth.
And just a mere 73,000 years ago -- which is like 30 seconds in planet time -- we humans had a close call and nearly became extinct when a volcano wiped out most of us.  Call it the original Survivor series. My uplifting takeaway from the exhibit was simple: We're likely doomed, at least eventually.
George Carlin, the legendary comic, once did a brilliant bit on the subject and said it even better: "There is nothing wrong with the planet. ... The planet is fine. The people are (screwed)."
Carlin's comedic genius aside, there is a deeper lesson here. All the mass extinctions to date have been caused by unavoidable external threats such as an earthquake. We can't fret much about those because even Oprah can't stop a meteor from destroying the planet, I think. At least not a really big one.
In contrast, our current threats are mostly of our own making, which we together can minimize. Or not. If not, then the next mass destruction will be a self-destruction.
That said, no matter how it all goes down, please excuse me for the moment for taking a pass on world destruction as I have more pressing things to address: such as preventing naked ballerinas with large wooden spoons from destroying the kitchen.
William Choslovsky is a lawyer in Chicago. 



Susan Casey dives in to 'The Wave'; Surfer Laird Hamilton serves as the author's guide to the ocean





NEW YORK -- At a fancy Manhattan restaurant, Laird Hamilton, the legendary big-wave surfer from Hawaii, is the only customer without socks, in sandals, jeans and a T-shirt that accentuates his muscles.
If there's a dress code, no one mentions it. Hamilton is here to have lunch with Susan Casey, author of The Wave: In Pursuit of the Rogues, Freaks, and Giants of the Ocean (Doubleday, $27.95).
Hamilton, 46, is one of the main subjects of the book, which is not so much about surfing as the power and mysteries of the ocean at its most extreme. It's about climate change and the physics of big waves (big as in 100 feet high or more), and the scientists who study them and the surfers who ride them.
Casey, 44, editor of O magazine, recalls telling Hamilton about a freak North Sea storm in 2000 that battered and nearly sank a research ship -- the opening scene in her book.
"He wished he had been there," she says, shaking her head.
Hamilton laughs. "What's hell for some is heaven for others." A storm like that, he says, can stir up "the ultimate playground" for big-wave surfers.
Casey, who wrote The Devil's Teeth, a 2005 best seller about white sharks, didn't want to write a book just about surfing but needed a guide to "open up his world to me" and provide a "glimpse of the ocean with its gloves off."
Enter Hamilton, who was Pierce Brosnan's stunt double in the surfing scenes of the 2002 James Bond film, Die Another Day. More important, he helped invent a new way of riding the biggest waves: "tow surfing," or using ropes and a partner on a jet ski to get into position.
Casey met Hamilton in 2005 when she wrote a Sports Illustrated article about the tension between commercial surfing competitions and surfers such as Hamilton, who views what he does more as art than something to be ranked and judged.
They hit if off. Hamilton may not be into organized competitions, but he appreciated that Casey had been a competitive swimmer. A Toronto native, she attended the University of Arizona on a swimming scholarship.
"That's useful," the writer says, "when you're in the ocean with your subject and he says, 'Let's swim over there,' and 'over there' is 4 miles away."
"She has a love for the water," the surfer says. "That was our biggest connection to start with."
Casey says The Wave is not a collaboration, although she acknowledges paying Hamilton -- neither will discuss details -- in what she calls an "access-related financial arrangement." She says he had no editorial control over what she wrote.
Hamilton, who lists his job as "self-employed athlete," says the money wasn't significant: "If I was a purist, I wouldn't have sponsors, but then I'd have to dig ditches or something for a living, and I wouldn't be surfing."
Whatever Casey paid Hamilton, she seems to have gotten her money's worth, including a surprise ride on a jet ski, clinging to Hamilton, down the face of a 40-foot-high wave nicknamed "Jaws" in Maui.
"It's one thing to see it," Hamilton says. "I thought she needed to feel it."
Casey writes: "Though it would be weeks before I fully processed the feeling of riding Jaws, nothing I had ever done or seen or been through had made me feel so alive. Intellectually, I had always known that big-wave surfers were addicted to their pursuit. Now I knew why." 


VW plans fun for L.A. Auto Show; Eos hardtop convertible will show off its revised look and new features





Back before war, recession and climate change, the Los Angeles Auto Show was about fun, sun and convertibles. Now Volkswagen is going to bring a bit of the pizazz back with the new Eos convertible.
Volkswagen of America has released the first images of its significantly enhanced 2012 Eos hardtop convertible that will be introduced Nov. 17 during the press days for the show. The new Eos will be in showrooms next spring, just in time for top-down season.
Not only does the Eos get a revised look, it will offer lots of new features.
VW changed the grille, giving it shiny black louvers, and the rear gets new LED taillights -- all the rage these days -- and a redesigned bumper. Inside, Eos gets a new instrument panel with color display and a second-generation parallel-parking-assist feature.
The hardtop roof can be opened and closed via wireless remote control. The headlights will automatically switch between high and low beams based on how sensors react to the traffic.
That's all VW is giving away for now, but more to come in L.A.
Buick using loaners to sell
With a refreshed lineup and new spirit, Buick executives are embarking on a service loaner plan to try to get more Buick and other General Motors car owners to try the new Buicks. As envisioned, owners who bring in GM cars for service would get a fresh, new Buick to try out for a day or two.
Since GM shed Pontiac, Hummer, Saab and Saturn during its bankruptcy, this is seen as an opportunity to keep drivers in upscale GM cars.
"We're trying to retain them in the GM family," says spokeswoman Dayna Hart. For instance, "A lot of the Pontiac (owners) were G6 buyers, pretty close in size to the new Regal."
Between Regal, the larger LaCrosse sedan and Enclave crossover, Buick executives feel they have a lot to show off. No date yet on when the service loan program will begin. One challenge is to make sure dealers are stocked with desirable Buicks in their loaner fleets.
Redone, renamed Chrysler 200
Chrysler Group has posted photos and details on its new 2011 Chrysler 200.
The 200 is actually a makeover with a new name of Chrysler's much-maligned Sebring sedan and is aimed at making the brand a truly competitive entry in the hard-fought midsize sedan market.
Chrysler said the redo touched "virtually every system" in the car. It gave no on-sale date but said it will be before year's end.
The interior is new, and its ambience should be helped by NVH (noise, vibration and harshness) upgrades that include acoustic glass in the windshield and  front side windows.
Chrysler says it has given the front-drive 200 improved handling, along with its new global engines: the 2.4-liter four and the Pentastar V-6.
Porsche HQ bans Facebook
Porsche in Germany is blocking employees' access to Facebook and other social sites from company workstations.
Its security chief, Rainer Benne, told German business weekly WirtschaftsWoche that foreign spy agencies systematically use Facebook and other sites to contact employees and win their trust so they can mine corporate secrets.
The ban does not apply to Porsche staff here. "The employees of Porsche Cars North America can access Facebook from their workstations," Bernd Harling, head of public relations, told Drive On. 




Study: Acidic oceans threaten young coral





Global warming that deposits carbon in the oceans and turns them more acidic is threatening the early life cycle of coral reefs near Florida and throughout the Caribbean Sea, a study published Monday says.
Although other research has looked at how the world's increasingly acidic oceans affect adult coral, this is the first one to document its impact on coral's early life stages.
Coral reefs don't just make pretty screen savers: They add $30 billion to the U.S. economy each year through tourism, diving, coastal protection and fishing, says study lead author Rebecca Albright of the University of Miami's Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science.
"There have been very few, if any studies that had looked at the effects on early life-history stages, such as fertilization, larval settlement and recruitment," Albright says. "Recruitment" refers to the process of replacing dead coral with new coral.
Over the next century, the study found, recruitment of new corals could drop by as much as 73%.
The study appears in this week's issue of the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
"Reproductive failure of young coral species is an increasing concern since reefs are already highly stressed from bleaching (because of unusually warm seawater), hurricanes, disease and poor water quality," says study co-author Chris Langdon, an associate professor at the Rosenstiel School.
Scientists in this study looked at one species of coral -- Elkhorn coral, known as acropora palmata -- a prime reef-building species that once dominated tropical coral reef ecosystems.
Elkhorn was placed on the U.S. Endangered Species List in 2006  because of severe population declines.
"In order for that species to not go extinct, we have to be replacing them as we're losing them," Albright says. "The implications of this work show that ocean acidification ...  is interfering with that ability. "
Ocean acidification refers to the increased amounts of atmospheric carbon dioxide (caused by the burning of fossil fuels) absorbed into the world's oceans. This additional carbon not only warms the oceans, but also radically transforms their chemistry, according to a National Research Council report published this year.
Is the fear of ocean acidification overblown? Perhaps, say the authors of a study published in May 2009, also in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
The authors of that study, led by Rebecca Gooding of the University of British Columbia in Vancouver, dispute the belief that ocean acidification harms all marine life-forms and urged that caution should be taken when examining "overgeneralized predictions."
Albright says the field of ocean acidification research has only blossomed in the past 10 years, and it's only in the past couple of years that scientists have shifted their focus to look at the early life cycle in addition to the adults of various species, such as coral and shellfish. 



With poor fixes in Congress, gridlock might be best thing




I hope there is gridlock on almost all of the issues mentioned in USA TODAY's government inaction debate because, sadly, it seems far more likely that Congress will do the wrong thing instead of the right thing in trying to solve them ("Gridlock's just another word for lack of leadership," Our view, Thursday).
The problems with most of the items  listed -- spending, taxes, climate change and immigration -- are the result of failed government policies. The government doesn't have a track record of success when it comes to domestic problems.  The government usually creates 10 new problems for every one  it claims to solve.
I don't want climate change to be the next example. The proposed treatments are likely worse than the disease. I don't deny that global warming exists. I just think proposed fixes won't work and will do great economic harm.  Immigration reform is easy. Congress should move forward with those aspects of reform that everyone agrees on. Everybody agrees illegal immigration is bad for the nation. President Obama should get serious about controlling the border in order to reduce it. Once we have demonstrated that we don't need comprehensive immigration reform, then we can legalize those who remain.
Edward Hoffman
Joliet, Ill.
Need less partisan leaders
Reading USA TODAY's editorial on gridlock, which stated that a "lack of leadership" in Washington is causing it, and its opposing view by Michael Tanner, which promoted a libertarian ideology, made me wonder if both weren't wrong. The causes of the problems we face today have one thing in common, not lack of leadership but poor leadership on both sides.
If we had elected less partisan, non-ideological leaders who were competent and whose sole purpose was to do what was in the best interests of the electorate (and not special interests), then we likely wouldn't have the problems we have today. That would have allowed us to avoid gridlock.
Sam Huddleston
Surprise, Ariz.
Gridlock won't solve issue
When House Speaker Nancy Pelosi was elected, some liberal Democrats demanded hearings on former president George W. Bush and former vice president Dick Cheney. Many demanded impeachment proceedings. She quieted the noise.
Now Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell has said twice that the Republicans' No. 1  priority will be ridding the country of President Obama.
Rep. John Boehner, the presumptive House speaker, had better be Pelosi-like. Eight years of Bush tax cuts did not produce jobs. Maybe extending tax cuts will. Maybe cutting spending will. Maybe repealing ObamaCare will. No one knows for sure. What we do know is gridlock will not.
Larry D. Fowler
Brooklyn, N.Y.
Some solutions must be stopped
I must agree with Cato Institute senior fellow Michael Tanner and his opposing view in the government inaction debate ("More gridlock, please").
With the prospect of a bill implementing the proposals put forth by Alan Simpson and Erskine Bowles on deficit reduction, we will need much gridlock.  This bill could be as bad as the health care  law, maybe worse, if that's possible. This proposal would destroy many people's personal finances.
As a retiree, I carefully planned my retirement finances for years. The current tax code is not good, but at least I know how much I need to pay.
Under the new plan, I may pay more, I may pay less -- I won't know until it's too late. The mortgage interest deduction change alone will destroy any rebound in the housing market.
As far as Social Security, I just want the money back I paid for 35 years. If the Social Security trust fund hadn't been stolen for other uses, we wouldn't be talking about cuts in benefits.
Major changes shouldn't be made during a recession. When the economy rebounds, many of our financial problems will go away.
Mark Botkin
Rochester, Mich. 

Experts claim climate report plagiarized; They cite instances of lifted passages in influential 2006 study





An influential 2006 congressional report that raised questions about the validity of global warming research was partly based on material copied from textbooks, Wikipedia and the writings of one of the scientists criticized in the report, plagiarism experts say.
Review of the 91-page report by three experts contacted by USA TODAY found repeated instances of passages lifted word for word and what appear to be thinly disguised paraphrases.
The charges of plagiarism don't negate one of the basic premises of the report -- that climate scientists used poor statistics in two widely noted papers.
But the allegations come as some in Congress call for more investigations of climate scientists like the one that produced the Wegman report.
"It kind of undermines the credibility of your work criticizing others' integrity when you don't conform to the basic rules of scholarship," Virginia Tech plagiarism expert Skip Garner says.
Led by George Mason University statistician Edward Wegman, the 2006 report criticized the statistics and scholarship of scientists who found the last century the warmest in 1,000 years.
"The report was integral to congressional hearings about climate scientists," says Aaron Huertas of the Union of Concerned Scientists in Washington, D.C. "And it preceded a lot of conspiratorial thinking polluting the public debate today about climate scientists."
But in March, climate scientist Raymond Bradley of the University of Massachusetts asked GMU, based in Fairfax, Va., to investigate "clear plagiarism" of one of his textbooks.
Bradley says he learned of the copying from a year-long analysis of the Wegman report made by retired computer scientist John Mashey of Portola Valley, Calif. Mashey's analysis concludes that 35 of the report's 91 pages "are mostly plagiarized text, but often injected with errors, bias and changes of meaning." Copying others' text or ideas without crediting them violates universities' standards, according to Liz Wager of the London-based Committee on Publication Ethics.
Allegations under review
"The matter is under investigation," says GMU spokesman Dan Walsch by e-mail. In a phone interview, Wegman said he could not comment at the university's request. In an earlier e-mail Wegman sent to Joseph Kunc of the University of Southern California, however, he called the plagiarism charges "wild conclusions that have nothing to do with reality."
The plagiarism experts queried by USA TODAY disagree after viewing the Wegman report:
* "Actually fairly shocking," says Cornell physicist Paul Ginsparg by e-mail. "My own preliminary appraisal would be 'guilty as charged.' "
*"If I was a peer reviewer of this report and I was to observe the paragraphs they have taken, then I would be obligated to report them," says Garner of Virginia Tech, who heads a copying detection effort. "There are a lot of things in the report that rise to the level of inappropriate."
*"The plagiarism is fairly obvious when you compare things side-by-side," says Ohio State's Robert Coleman, who chairs OSU's misconduct committee.
The report was requested in 2005 by Rep. Joe Barton, R-Texas, then the head of the House energy committee. Barton cited the report  in an October letter to The Washington Post when he wrote that Penn State climate scientist Michael Mann's work was "rooted in fundamental errors of methodology that had been cemented in place as 'consensus' by a closed network of friends."
The Wegman report criticized 1998 and 1999 reports led by Mann (Bradley was a co-author) that calculated global temperatures over the last dozen centuries. It also contained an analysis of Mann's co-authors that appears partly cribbed from Wikipedia, Garner says.
Lisa Miller, a spokeswoman for Barton, reiterated the congressman's support of the Wegman report on Monday, saying it  "found significant statistical issues" with climate studies.
A 2006 report by the National Research Council (NRC), which examines scientific disputes under a congressional charter, largely validated Mann, Bradley and the other climate scientists, according to Texas A&M's Gerald North, the panel's head. The NRC report found the Wegman report's criticism of the type of statistics used in 1998 and 1999 papers reasonable but beside the point, as many subsequent studies had reproduced their finding that the 20th century was likely the warmest one in centuries.
In a 2007 presentation at the university, report co-author Yasmin Said of GMU said that a Barton committee staffer, Peter Spencer, provided the background material for the report. "Although Dr. Said's presentation seemed to imply that we were being coached by the Republicans by being given only their selected materials to look at, this was not true," Wegman said in response to a USA TODAY freedom-of-information act request.
Information not forthcoming
The Wegman report called for improved "sharing of research materials, data and results" from scientists. But in response to a request for materials related to the report, GMU  said it "does not have access to the information." Separately in that response, Wegman said his "email was downloaded to my notebook computer and was erased from the GMU mail server," and he would not disclose any report communications or materials because the "work was done offsite," aside from one meeting with Spencer.
Said did not reply to requests for comments on her role in the report.
"It's nothing personal. I don't want these guys fired or anything," Bradley says. "They should just retract or withdraw the report as you would any scientific publication that has these sort of problems." 


Study links lower carbon emissions to recession; Levels predicted to rise again as economy rallies





Worldwide emissions of carbon dioxide, widely blamed as the chief cause of global warming, dropped from 2008 to 2009, largely because of the global economic slowdown, according to a study released Sunday.  It was the first decline since the late 1990s.
The study, published in the journal Nature Geoscience, is part of the annual carbon budget update from the Global Carbon Project, a group of emissions experts and economists from several international environmental organizations.
The emissions decrease of 1.3% from 2008 to 2009 was directly related to the economic crisis, says study lead author Pierre Friedlingstein of the University of Exeter in the United Kingdom. "There is a close link between the world's gross domestic product and emissions of carbon dioxide," he says.
Over the past century, human activities, primarily the burning of fossil fuels such as coal, gas and oil, have added increasing amounts of carbon dioxide into the Earth's atmosphere. Production of cement also contributes a tiny amount of carbon to the air.
The 2009 drop was less than half of what was expected, says Friedlingstein, partly because the drop in global GDP was less than expected. The total of 30.8 billion tons of carbon dioxide was the second highest in human history, just below the 2008 emissions.
The study projects that if the economic recovery proceeds as expected, global fossil fuel emissions will increase by more than 3% in 2010, approaching the high emissions growth rates observed from 2000 to 2008.
Last year's worldwide decrease included significant regional differences. The largest decreases occurred in Europe, Japan and North America: 6.9% in the United States, 8.6% in the U.K., 7% in Germany, 11.8% in Japan and 8.4% in Russia. The study notes that some emerging economies recorded substantial increases in their total emissions, including 8% in China and 6.2% in India.
Each country reports its own emission totals to the United Nations, says Friedlingstein. China remains the top emitter of carbon dioxide from the burning of  fossil fuels, followed by the USA, India, Russia and Japan.
Is the emissions drop entirely a result of the economic crisis? No, says Dan Lashof, director of the Natural Resources Defense Council climate center, who was not part of the study. "The decreases in emissions for the big countries were larger than their GDP decline," he says. "It's not just the recession."
Lashof says concerted efforts to limit and reduce carbon emissions and invest in clean energy in countries such as Germany and the U.K. could be paying dividends.
The fact that fewer trees are being cut down in some parts of the world is also good news. "We found global emissions from deforestation have decreased through the last decade by more than 25%, compared to the 1990s," says study co-author and Global Carbon Project executive director Pep Canadell. Cutting down trees and clearing forests -- known as deforestation -- releases carbon dioxide into the atmosphere as the trees rot and are burned. 



Summit wheel-spinning; Dealing with climate change isn't a matter of will power; it's a matter of economics. Next week's meeting in Cancun should focus on real solutions.





In a week's time, several thousand well-meaning officials from 194 countries will gather in Cancun, Mexico, for yet another global climate summit. And just as they did last year in Copenhagen,  and the year before in Poznan, Poland,  and in fact every year since 1995  in a variety of locales from Kyoto, Japan,  to Marrakech, Morocco,  they will fill the air with apocalyptic warnings about what will happen to the planet if we don't cut carbon emissions drastically. After that, they will go home, once again having done nothing meaningful about global warming.
Why do we keep running in fruitless circles when it comes to climate change? Most climate activists will tell you it's the result of a failure of will. If we had the requisite backbone, they insist, we'd simply stop pumping millions of tons of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere each year as a result of our addiction to fossil fuels such as coal and oil. Since we obviously don't, they argue, we need to find some mechanism, such as imposing hefty carbon taxes, that would effectively force us to do the right thing.
Why fossil fuels?
This notion is attractively simple, but it ignores a fundamental reality. The reason we continue to use fossil fuels is not because we're weak or lazy or enjoy annoying Al Gore. Rather, it's a matter of basic economics. As energy sources go, fossil fuels are much cheaper and more efficient than any of the green alternatives such as solar or wind power. And even as hard a climate hard-liner as James Hansen of NASA concedes, "As long as fossil fuels are the cheapest form of energy, they are going to continue to be used."
This is why developing nations such as China and India are so resistant to the idea of drastically cutting their carbon emissions.  And it's why the developed world has found it impossible to live up to any of the grand carbon-cutting promises made over the past two decades at climate summits in Rio, Kyoto, and most recently Copenhagen. It's not that Third World governments don't understand the link between greenhouse gases and global warming; it's that without the cheap energy that fossil fuels provide, there is absolutely no way they will be able to lift billions of their citizens out of poverty. And it's not that we in the West don't get the climate equation either; it's that very few of us are willing to suffer higher prices and slower economic growth.
Fortunately, there is a way out of this impasse. Instead of trying to solve global warming by making fossil fuels cost more, why not concentrate on making the green alternatives cost less? If we could make solar and wind and other green energy technologies competitive with coal and oil, no one would have to be compelled to do anything -- everyone would switch over in a heartbeat.
How do we bring down the cost of green energy? Think about the last great technological revolution that changed the world -- the digital one. We didn't promote the scientific breakthroughs that wound up putting PCs in hundreds of millions of homes by making slide rules and typewriters more expensive. Rather, it was the result of massive investments in research and development in areas such as solid-state physics and computer science. Why aren't we doing the same with green energy technologies?
Taken as a whole, the nations of the world spend a paltry $2 billion a year on green energy R&D.  As a result, these technologies are progressing at a snail's pace. We can (and should) do  better. But it will take a real commitment -- something on the order of roughly $100 billion a year (or roughly 0.2% of global GDP) to produce the kind of game-changing breakthroughs that ushered in the digital revolution.
'Transform our world'
All kinds of exciting technologies could benefit from this sort of investment -- everything from artificial photosynthesis (which would enable us to store solar energy cheaply and efficiently) to fourth-generation nuclear reactors (which would consume existing nuclear waste) -- any one of which could change our future for the better.
In the end, most of these bets probably won't pay off, but all we need to transform our world is for a few of them to work.  But to do that, we first need to recognize that solving global warming isn't a matter of backbone -- it's a matter of economics.
Bjorn Lomborg is author of The Skeptical Environmentalist and Cool It, head of the Copenhagen Consensus Center, and adjunct professor at Copenhagen Business School. Cool It, a documentary about him and his work, opened in the U.S.   on Nov. 12. 

U.N. meeting to tackle smaller climate issues; No major deals expected on global warming





As prospects dim for a major agreement on capping pollution worldwide, deforestation, renewable energy and other smaller steps that target global warming will take center stage at a United Nations meeting next week, observers predict.
Beginning Monday in Cancun, Mexico, the 12-day United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change will pick up where last year's meeting in Copenhagen left off: a global community seeking the fairest way to deal with a warming world.
"I would not look for any major agreement," says energy expert Reid Detchon of the United Nations Foundation, which supports U.N. causes. "I would look toward small agreements for progress being made."
At last year's Copenhagen meeting, world leaders did not come up with a successor treaty to the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, which expires in 2012. The protocol committed 37 industrial nations and the European Union -- excluding the U.S. -- to lowered greenhouse gas emissions, and measures designed to help limit global surface temperature warming to less than a 3.6-degree-Fahrenheit increase over pre-industrial levels. In the past century, these temperatures have risen about 1.3 degrees, according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.  A non-binding Copenhagen "Accord," which would continue the Kyoto effort, brokered by President Obama, has since picked up pledges from 138 countries to cut emissions, including a 17% U.S. cut by 2020.
"Cancun is going to answer the question of whether that agreement was progress or the beginning of the end," says Jonathan Lash of the World Resources Institute (WRI), an environmental think tank in Washington, D.C. Along with seeing whether the Copenhagen Accord can be made part of the successor agreement to Kyoto, Lash and others are looking to forge agreements on:
*Deforestation. An agreement on financing and monitoring measures would preserve forests. Timber losses contribute to carbon dioxide releases to the atmosphere, causing perhaps 12% to 17% of global greenhouse gas emissions, according to WRI.
*Clean energy. Steps toward agreement on "technology transfer" of more-efficient energy production methods to poor nations, which would keep patents protected, was one outcome of a recent Major Economies Forum meeting in Washington.
*Money. Developed nations pledged $30 billion from 2010 to 2012 to help poor ones pay for cleaner energy and prevention of deforestation, as well as infrastructure to adapt to inevitable climate changes.
Todd Stern, the Obama administration's special envoy on climate change, said in October at a University of Michigan speech that "many countries are arguing that we should capture the so-called low-hanging fruit -- the 'easier' issues on which there is less discord."
But Stern said that just signing those agreements without addressing emissions cuts and ways for verification "is a non-starter for the United States."
In particular, Stern charged that "Chinese negotiators have acted almost as though the (Copenhagen) Accord never happened," in backing away from its commitments. China's representatives complained that Western nations have for decades avoided commitments made in 1992 to limit emissions.
Hanging over the meeting is the question of whether an upcoming congressional fight over Environmental Protection Agency regulation of greenhouse gas emissions, required by a 2007 Supreme Court decision, will hinder the Obama administration from delivering on its 17% reduction goal. 

Obama feels opposing winds on climate effort; But must deliver on EPA rules





Jan. 2 isn't your ordinary Sunday. That day, the Obama administration officially starts regulating greenhouse gas emissions, and critics have issued dire predictions of economic destruction.
With all the fiery rhetoric about how damaging the regulations could be, the White House is under pressure to fulfill its vow to tackle climate change while avoiding the appearance it's hindering job growth.
GOP lawmakers have launched a series of efforts to hamstring the Environmental Protection Agency -- and that's before the rules have officially kicked in. Those efforts are likely to increase in frequency and in force in the next Congress as Republicans claim the House majority and industries continue to lobby  against the greenhouse gas regulations.
Incoming House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Fred Upton, R-Mich., last week accused EPA of advancing a "long regulatory assault" against domestic energy producers.
"The EPA has its foot firmly on the throat of our economic recovery," he said. "We will not allow the administration to regulate what they have been unable to legislate."
President Obama and top EPA officials insist they would have preferred comprehensive climate legislation, but they say they're legally bound to regulate greenhouse gases under the Clean Air Act after a 2007 U.S. Supreme Court decision ordered the EPA to determine whether the heat-trapping gases endanger the public. And within the confines of the law, the administration argues, it's doing the best it can.
So what actually happens Jan. 2?  New and upgraded industrial facilities such as power plants and refineries will be forced to install technologies to curb their greenhouse gas emissions.
At first, the greenhouse gas rules will apply only to new and modified plants that would already trigger control requirements based on their emissions of other pollutants regulated by EPA, like soot or smog.
Starting in July, large plants will fall under EPA's rules based only on their greenhouse gas output.
Industry attorney Jeff Holmstead warned that long delays could occur as authorities work to issue greenhouse gas permits for the first time and as opponents of new projects challenge the emission control requirements in court. Holmstead served as EPA air chief during the George W. Bush administration. 
