
Study: Banding penguins for science risks their lives





Studies that use penguins as indicators of global climate change need to be reconsidered because it might be metallic flipper bands used to track some penguins, and not the climate, that are contributing to those penguins' population declines, a new study says.
A French team of marine biologists says that putting flipper bands on king penguins impairs their survival and ability to reproduce and should be ended. The finding was based on a 10-year study on Indian Ocean islands north of Antarctica.
Other researchers, however, say the French team used bad bands and bad banding methods.
The report is in the new  edition of the journal Nature.
The French team put stainless steel bands on the flippers of 50 king penguins and put data chips under the skin of the tail in 50 others. The penguins lived on Possession Island. Over a decade beginning in 1998,  scientists observed that the banded penguins produced 39% fewer chicks and had a survival rate 16% lower than non-banded birds.
The banded penguins typically arrive at the breeding grounds on average 16 days later than non-banded birds. Late-arriving penguins are less likely to try to breed and, when they do breed, are less likely to produce chicks.
"We wanted to look at the same birds having a band for 10 years, so there's a big difference," says Claire Saraux of the University of Strasbourg.
Flipper bands, which are aluminum or stainless steel numbered bands bent around the upper portion of one flipper, are used to identify the birds so that researchers, using binoculars, can  follow the colony's overall health.
Rory Wilson, an aquatic biologist at Swansea University in the United Kingdom,  says because penguins are "big, robust birds," it's difficult to think that a small metal band would do much to them. But he and others have found  that on some species  the bands meant the birds were using 20% more energy to swim.
Dee Boersma, a conservation biologist and longtime penguin researcher at the University of Washington in Seattle, says she thinks the French team must have used particularly bad bands.
She published a paper last year that  found that bands do affect survival rates and breeding success for Magellanic penguins, especially for females, but that properly {filig}tted stainless-steel bands can be used on males with little impact on survival. "To draw the conclusion that we should quit flipper banding and that we can't tell anything about climate change from flipper banding data is wrong," Boersma says. 



States take lead in efforts to fight climate change; They're joining forces and spending more, but higher costs are a worry





Now that 2010 has gone down as one of history's hottest years, many states are choosing not to wait for Congress to tackle global warming and are taking their own steps to slash greenhouse gas emissions.
States are increasingly adopting stricter, energy-saving building codes; spending more money (partly federal) on energy efficiency; and prodding polluters to cut heat-trapping emissions.
"This is groundbreaking work the states are doing to provide leadership," says Kevin Kennedy of the California Air Resources Board, a state agency that approved rules in December to cut the state's carbon dioxide emissions 15% by 2020. This month, California began to require new TVs be more energy efficient, to phase out incandescent light bulbs (one year ahead of the national phaseout) and to enforce a green building code.
These efforts come as last year's Democratic-controlled Congress failed to approve a climate change bill and the new Republican-led House of Representatives seeks to stop the Environmental Protection Agency from regulating emissions.
States nearly doubled their spending on energy efficiency from 2007 to 2009, and twice as many -- now at least 20 -- have proposed or adopted energy-saving building codes since 2009, according to a study in October by the American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy, a non-profit group.
States are acting individually and collectively:
*Massachusetts announced last month that it will cut greenhouse gas emissions 25% from 1990 levels by 2020. "It's very doable," says Richard Sullivan, the state's secretary of energy and environmental affairs. "When you focus on energy efficiency, you can go a long way."
This year, the state will help fund ultra-efficient retrofits for some homes and give them a miles-per-gallon type of efficiency label. It's working to allow auto insurers to base their rates partly on a car's annual mileage.
*Three regional groups, representing at least 22 states, agreed last year to work together on "cap-and-trade" programs. The programs cap total emissions but allow businesses that pollute a lot to buy emissions credits from those that pollute less.
The regional groups include the Midwestern Greenhouse Gas Reduction Accord, signed by 10 governors, and the Western Climate Initiative, in which California, New Mexico, British Columbia, Ontario and Quebec are slated next January to begin a cap-and-trade program.
They're following the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI). Since 2009, 10 Eastern and Mid-Atlantic states have required power plants to buy allowances for emitting CO
, raising $777 million and reinvesting 80% of that in clean energy.
"You can reduce greenhouse gas emissions without having a significant impact on ratepayers," says Jonathan Shrag, the group's executive director, noting the average monthly bill rose 73 cents.
RGGI's consumer costs will escalate when carbon dioxide cuts are fully phased in, says David Kreutzer of the Heritage Foundation, a conservative think tank. He says such programs will slow economic growth and raise energy costs -- arguments that helped torpedo Congress' cap-and-trade bill. Kreutzer calls state efforts to cut greenhouses gas emissions "anemic and sporadic."
Some states, notably Texas, are bucking the EPA's efforts to regulate emissions, and several new governors, including Susana Martinez, R-N.M., have balked at cap-and-trade plans.
States, emboldened by Congress' inaction, will increasingly pick up the slack, says Dale Bryk of the Natural Resources Defense Council, an environmental group. She predicts, "We will see a lot more action this year." 




Can geoengineering put the freeze on global warming?; Ocean fertilization, space mirrors are among proposals





Scientists call it "geoengineering," but in plain speak, it means things like this: blasting tons of sulfate particles into the sky to reflect sunlight away from Earth; filling the ocean with iron filings to grow plankton that will suck up carbon; even dimming sunlight with space shades.
Each brings its own set of risks, but in a world fretting about the consequences of global warming, are these ideas whose time has come?
With 2010 tying as the world's warmest year on record and efforts to slow greenhouse gas emissions looking stymied, calls are rising for research into engineering our way out of global warming -- everything from launching solar shade spacecraft to genetically engineering green deserts. An international consortium of 12 universities and research institutes on Tuesday, for example, announced plans to pioneer large-scale "ocean fertilization" experiments aimed at using the sea to pull more greenhouse gases out of the sky.
Once the domain of scientists' off-hours schemes scrawled on cocktail napkins, such geoengineering is getting a serious look in the political realm.
"We're moving into a different kind of world," says environmental economist Scott Barrett of Columbia University. "Better we turn to asking if 'geoengineering' could work, than waiting until it becomes a necessity."
A National Academy of Sciences' best estimate has global warming bumping up average temperatures by 3 to 7 degrees Fahrenheit by the end of the century. Meanwhile, greenhouse gas emissions that are largely responsible, most  from burning the modern economy's main fuels, coal and oil, look set to continue to rise for the next quarter-century, according to Energy Information Agency estimates.
"That's where geoengineering comes in," says international relations expert David Victor of the University of California-San Diego. "Research into geoengineering creates another option for the public."
Geoengineering takes its cue from the natural experiment that actually had made the only dent in global warming's rise in the last two decades -- the 1991 eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines, which blasted more than 15 million tons of sulfur dioxide 21 miles high, straight into the stratosphere. The stratosphere suspended those sulfur particles in the air worldwide, where the haze they created scattered and reflected sunlight away from the Earth and cooled global atmospheric temperatures nearly 0.7 to 0.9 degrees Fahrenheit in 1992 and 1993, before finally washing out, according to NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies estimates. Firing about half that much sulfur into the stratosphere every year for 30 years would help stabilize global warming's rise, National Center for Atmospheric Research climate scientist Tom Wigley estimated in a much-debated 2006 Science journal report.
Humanity would effectively become addicted to sky-borne sulfates to keep the cooling on track. The tradeoff is that rain and snow patterns would likely shift, a 2008 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences study found, consigning hundreds of millions of the poorest people on the planet in Africa and Asia to recurring drought.
No longer eyed askance
"Geoengineering is no longer a taboo topic at scientific meetings. They are looking at it as one more policy prescription," says Science magazine reporter Eli Kintisch, author of Hack the Planet: Science's Best Hope -- Or Worst Nightmare -- For Averting Climate Catastrophe. "But it is yet to become a household word."
That may be changing, as the terms of debate about geoengineering become clear. On the pro-research side, this October the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology called for more research into geoengineering, "to better understand which technologies or methods, if any, represent viable stopgap strategies for managing our changing climate and which pose unacceptable risks." On the more cautious side, a United Nations Environment Programme species conservation meeting in Nagoya, Japan, ended that same month with a call for, "no climate-related geoengineering activities," without environmental and scientific review.
What are the actual geoengineering proposals? Broadly, they come in two flavors: those that deal with greenhouse gases directly by soaking up carbon dioxide (the greenhouse gas with the biggest warming impact); and those that seek to limit the sunlight that warms those greenhouse gases. Here's a sampling, from the deep ocean to deep space:
*Ocean fertilization. Dumping iron filings into the ocean to spur phytoplankton blooms is the saltwater version of forestation. The increased mass of the plankton's cells would swell with carbon pulled from the air. On the downside, it may kill fish, belch out other greenhouse gases such as methane, and hasn't worked very well in small trials.
*Forestation. Intense planting of trees and reclaiming deserts with hardier plants is one of the ideas endorsed at the recent Cancun, Mexico, climate meeting, where representatives of 192 nations made some progress on an international climate agreement. More fantastic versions, endorsed by Princeton physicist Freeman Dyson, would rely on genetic engineering to produce trees that act as natural carbon scrubbers, their trunks swollen with carbon pulled from the air.
*Cloud engineering. Painting rooftops white, genetically engineering crops to have shinier surfaces, and floating blocks of white Styrofoam in the oceans are all proposals to mimic the effects of clouds, whose white surfaces reflect sunlight. Pumping sea salt into the sky from thousands of "spray ships" could increase clouds themselves. Cost-effectiveness aside, such cloud-seeding might end up dumping rain on the ocean or already soggy regions, instead of where it's needed.
*Pinatubo a-go-go. As mentioned above, sulfur aerosols could be fired into the sky by cannons, released by balloons or dropped from planes.
*Space mirrors. Hundreds of thousands of thin reflective yard-long disks fired into a gravitational balance point between the sun and Earth could dim sunlight. Cost aside, rocket failures or collisions  might lead to a tremendous orbital debris cloud circling the Earth. And a recent Geophysical Research Letters space tourism report suggests the rocket fuel burned to launch the needed number of shades would dump enough black soot -- which absorbs sunlight and heats the atmosphere -- to increase average global temperatures about 1.4 degrees.
"Most of the technologies are not yet proven and are at the theoretical or research phase," an August Congressional Research Service report noted.
On the environmental side, cutting temperature increases through these techniques may still shift rain and snow patterns, leaving the planet cooler, but it could also trigger droughts across vast swaths of farmland in Africa and India. Further, ocean fertilization could contribute to mass killing of sea life and releases of methane greenhouse gas, while using sulfur aerosols could bring not only drought but also  enlarged ozone holes.
Leaving aside the environmental risks each one carries, the estimated costs tend to increase with how quickly each method removes carbon or deflects sunlight. The space reflectors would top the bill at a cost of several trillion dollars over 25 years.
"Geoengineering technologies, once developed, may enable short-sighted and unwise deployment, with potentially serious unforeseen consequences," said a 2009 American Meteorological Society statement. Turning over weather management to human beings raises, "legal, ethical, diplomatic, and even national security concerns," the statement added. Deflected storm tracks could result in floods such as the ones hitting Australia last month or Pakistan last year. And simply cutting temperatures won't stop the rise in ocean acidification arising from increased carbon dioxide levels in the air, which may affect marine life underlying the ocean food web.
Simply putting a worldwide price on carbon emissions from smokestacks and letting the marketplace lead to lower carbon emissions would likely be cheaper and more sensible than geoengineering, says Barrett, the economist. "But let's face it. We're talking about (geoengineering) because we don't have a price on carbon."
That's why geoengineering could happen before a global climate treaty ever passes the U.S. Senate, suggests Victor. International climate talks rest on getting 192 self-interested and short-sighted nations to cooperate in ways that will benefit some and cost others, particularly coal-powered ones such as the United States and China. But with geoengineering, you only need one nation to start "hacking," or geoengineering, the planet.
"It would be not at all surprising to wake up one morning and discover that Chinese testing (of geoengineering) has begun on a large scale," Victor says. "That would freak everyone out and create huge international tensions."
No international treaty governs geoengineering, other than a 2008 amendment to ocean pollution agreements limiting ocean fertilization to research studies.
Still a foreign concept to many
A Yale University survey of 1,001 people nationwide last year found that 1% could correctly describe geoengineering. The field needs to be researched, suggests climate scientist Michael MacCracken of the Climate Institute in Washington, D.C., before opinions harden without accurate information. Geoengineering at this point looks like one of many options in addressing climate change, MacCracken adds. "You can only geoengineer so much before the side effects become so much worse than the cure that it doesn't make sense to bother."
He and others argue geoengineering research should begin in earnest, before some abrupt climate change, such as Greenland's ice sheet melting precipitously, stampedes the world into an overreaction and rush to costly technology as a quick, untested fix.
"No research is really going on in a lot of these areas," he says, raising the prospect of a lot of fruitless or counterproductive climate engineering efforts suddenly sprouting in a global panic about collapsing ice sheets decades from now.
Global warming by itself is a kind of geoengineering, noted as far back as 1896  by the Swedish scientist Svante Arrhenius, who calculated that doubling the amount of carbon dioxide (the most noted greenhouse gas) in the atmosphere by burning fossil fuels would likely warm the atmosphere by 9 degrees. Arrhenius supposed that would take thousands of years to happen, based on fossil fuel use rates at the turn of the century. Instead, the global average temperature has warmed about 1.4 degrees since he made his estimate, as carbon dioxide levels have increased tremendously, and his 9-degree increase is now within the range of forecasts for 2100.
"I think it is settled that some climate engineering research will go forward," Kintisch says. "We haven't seen it enter the national debate yet. Hard to know what will happen when it does. That may be the biggest question." 




'Birdemic' swoops in with cult-film abandon; Global warming message lurks in low-budget fun





Faye Dunaway may have forcibly tried to get rid of coat hangers in Mommie Dearest, but James Nguyen is bringing them back, one vicious computer-generated bird at a time.
The Vietnam-born filmmaker has added another to the list of midnight cult movies with Birdemic: Shock and Terror, now out on DVD and Blu-ray.
Fans bring rolls of toilet paper, water pistols and toast to screenings of The Rocky Horror Picture Show. But Birdemic lovers are more apt to brandish wire coat hangers -- the weapons of choice to vanquish winged enemies in Nguyen's "romantic thriller," which is inspired both by Alfred Hitchcock's The Birds and Al Gore's An Inconvenient Truth.
His heroes? Well, that depends on how you look at it. You could say it's software salesman Rod (Alan Bagh) and lingerie model Nathalie (Whitney Moore), former high school classmates who start dating before all avian hell breaks loose. Or if you're more environmentally inclined, you might root for the birds.
"It's a global-warming metaphor, an abnormal force of nature like Hurricane Katrina or these giant jellyfish that attack people on the beach in Spain and Japan," Nguyen says. "The reason (the birds) attack is that global warming has caused them to be mutant, toxic and flammable. That's why, when they take a kamikaze drive, they explode, and when they drop bird fluid on some of the cast, they get burned."
Yes, folks -- watch this film and you may think twice about that pigeon lurking nearby.
The weapon of second choice
While Birdemic will probably never be honored at the Oscars -- unless they add a Best Use of Exploding CGI Vultures category -- Nguyen's enthusiasm for his so-bad-it's-good film and his do-it-yourself attitude were infectious to everybody around the low-budget production.
Even though Nguyen carries one at every Birdemic screening, the coat hangers didn't even have a part in his original script. In a moment of danger at a motel, Rod and Nathalie were supposed to grab a shower rod from a room to fend off attacking birds. But there was no rod available at the Motel 6 where they were filming the scene. There were coat hangers, though.
"There's not a lot you can do to prepare yourself for something like swatting away non-existent birds with coat hangers," Moore admits. "At that point in the shooting, I was pretty much just along for the ride."
Another change on the fly: The  characters were supposed to hop into an RV and flee down the highway. When Nguyen couldn't afford to rent one, or even buy an old one, he found a Ford Aerostar for sale for $300 in a Chevron parking lot. Not only did the minivan become the RV, but as the birds fly in for their final barrage, the van became the house where the battle was to take place because Nguyen ran out of money.
"There is a sincerity to the story," the director says.
Bagh likens working with Nguyen to "being in the middle of a tornado with a volcano erupting every 15 seconds. Things got pretty chaotic at times. We worked long hours, I slept in my car, I slept on his couch. Also, we didn't have a crew, so Whitney and I were pretty much the crew, which was exhausting. ... But  it was worth it."
Pecking for a studio deal
Nguyen, 44, who fled Vietnam with his family in 1975 before the Fall of Saigon, never went to film school -- he proudly says he went to the "school of Hitchcock cinema." After watching hundreds of the British director's movies -- especially Nguyen's favorite, Vertigo -- he has picked up a few things. Like his idol, Nguyen wrote himself into Birdemic, in a blink-and-you'll-miss it part in a Vietnamese eatery. He cast The Birds star Tippi Hedren in Birdemic as well as his first film, 2003's Julie and Jack.
Like his character Rod, Nguyen is himself a Silicon Valley software salesman when not behind a camera, a gig that helped finance the $10,000 Birdemic. He says he was inches away from a deal with Paramount Pictures in July. He pauses wistfully at the thought. "I think that I have achieved my American dream, but it would be much more complete with that three-picture deal with a Hollywood studio."
He'll get a second chance at one of those deals with Birdemic II: The Resurrection 3D. (You didn't think there'd be just one, did you?) This time around, a platoon of eagles and vultures lay waste to Hollywood and its denizens. Nguyen has built his own 3-D camera rig, using the same technique James Cameron used for Avatar.
Sadly, the birds will return in Birdemic II, but not the coat hangers. Nguyen has a plan, however.
"Ask any bird expert or animal-control person, 'How do you defend yourself against birds attacking you?' Whether it's a pigeon or a seagull or an eagle or a vulture, they'll tell you to use an umbrella. In Birdemic II, the umbrella is the coat hanger." 




How to help scientists and the public see eye-to-eye





Science has a public persuasion problem. If that weren't already clear, we now have something close to final confirmation, courtesy of polls finding that huge swaths of the American public are confused, ill-informed, or just plain unconvinced about global warming.
High levels of disconnection between scientists and the public are also evident around issues such as vaccination safety, organic food, evolution, and other areas where science intersects with politics, religion, values and faddism.
Do people deny science because they are too poorly educated to understand the facts right under their noses, as scientists too easily allege? Because scientists are partisan activists, as conservatives claim? Or is a right-wing conspiracy to blame, as some on the left contend?
As a sociologist who has spent his professional life examining how Americans come to common misbeliefs, I suggest another possibility: Science lacks what might be called public literacy.
It is true that America's long-term success requires a scientifically literate public. But as more science advocates are beginning to recognize, we have a better chance of fostering scientific literacy if we can achieve its inverse: a scientific community that is more publicly literate.
Understanding the public
Scientists and their advocates need to become more knowledgeable about how people come to their beliefs -- who they rely on for scientific information, what they hear, and through which filters they hear it. Thankfully, the past few years have seen a flurry of projects and campaigns that largely resist the understandable temptation to hunker down and aim instead at overcoming the persistent barriers to public understanding of the fruits and meanings of scientific labors.
The American Academy of Arts and Sciences  has organized off-the-record workshops, bringing together science experts and non-scientist members of the public to explore, among other challenges, how science can gain broader public trust.
Meanwhile, hundreds of climate scientists are banding together to engage the political battle over climate change. As stated by one participant, Scott Mandia of New York's Suffolk County Community College,  "The notion that truth will prevail is not working. The truth has been out there for the past two decades, and nothing has changed."
It's not about data
Campus-based efforts have begun, as well. Stony Brook University in New York has launched the Center for Communicating Science, and here at Lewis & Clark College, our John Rogers Science Research Program  pairs students' laboratory research with training and practice at presenting their projects to audiences in compelling, accessible ways.
How well these efforts succeed will depend on how successful they become at understanding and engaging in communication with a wide audience. Simply turning up the volume in an effort to get the message through, whether by increasing the number of messages or their fervor, is unlikely to work.
Nor are pleas for rationality and greater respect for science likely to win the day. Were hard data and cold logic all that mattered, any number of common personal behaviors would be long gone by now, from smoking to overeating. As any skilled public relations practitioner will attest, successful communication meets people on their own turf -- by means that address emotions, fears and values.
I do not mean to suggest that scientists transform themselves into Don Draper-style Mad Men  and embark on a course of Madison Avenue-style spin. But scientists who want members of the public to better understand their work ought to start by understanding them.
Barry Glassner is president of Lewis & Clark College in Portland, Ore., and the author of The Culture of Fear: Why Americans Are Afraid of the Wrong Things. 



Justices doubt courts' global warming limits; Emissions case raises questions about expertise and standards





The Supreme Court appeared ready to rule that federal judges cannot set limits on greenhouse gas emissions, after a majority of justices suggested Tuesday that such disputes over global warming are better left to Congress and federal regulators.
Five power companies, including American Electric Power, are appealing a lower-court decision that would permit a group of six states and the city of New York to sue under federal "public nuisance" law and claim the plants' emissions intensify global warming.
During a spirited session of oral arguments, the justices voiced doubt that judges have the authority or expertise to handle the complex emissions dilemma that is international in scope and that the  government says is being addressed by the Environmental Protection Agency. A ruling would determine whether states can seek remedies in court for harm caused by carbon dioxide emissions and whether utilities would be subject to new litigation and possible caps on emissions.
"Asking a court to set standards for emissions," Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg said, "sounds like the kind of thing that EPA does. Congress set up the EPA to promulgate standards for emissions."
"How does a district judge decide what is reasonable and cost effective?" Justice Samuel Alito asked. "This is not a situation in which the emission of greenhouse gases can be totally prohibited."
Tuesday's environmental dispute tests the separation of powers among branches of government. The question is whether judges may hear allegations that power plant emissions are contributing to global warming and hurting people's health and the environment.
The six states (Connecticut, New York, California, Iowa, Rhode Island, Vermont) and New York City cite as examples across the country increasing smog and heat-related mortality, reduced crop and livestock yields and the shrinking of mountain snowpack. The states say the five big plants exacerbate the harm by emitting 650 million tons of carbon dioxide a year, which the states say is 10% of the nation's annual emissions. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the 2nd Circuit, based in New York, said the case could go forward. It said court action would not conflict with federal regulators because EPA had not finalized any regulation of greenhouse gas emissions at the power plants.
Appealing the 2nd Circuit decision, lawyer Peter Keisler, representing the power companies, said the states have wrongly asked judges "to perform a legislative and regulatory function" on an issue that "is among the most complex, multifaceted, and consequential of any policy issue now before the country."
Supporting that general position was acting U.S. Solicitor General Neal Katyal, who told the justices, "In the 222 years that this court has been sitting, it has never heard a case with so many potential perpetrators and so many potential victims."
He urged the justices to rule that the greenhouse gas dispute is not a matter for judicial resolution. "The very name of the alleged nuisance, 'global warming,' itself," he said, "tells you much of what you need to know."
Ginsburg asked what the EPA was doing to reduce emissions. Katyal said any power company that seeks to increase its carbon dioxide emissions would be subject to new regulation and that other limits are being devised.
New York Solicitor General Barbara Underwood, urging the court to let the case proceed, said such EPA promises for limits on emissions are not enough. "A lot can happen to delay or derail the fulfillment of a promise," she said. 




Climate study gets pulled over plagiarism





Evidence of plagiarism and complaints about the peer-review process have led a statistics journal to retract a federally funded study that condemned scientific support for global warming.
The study, which appeared in 2008 in the journal Computational Statistics and Data Analysis, was headed by statistician Edward Wegman of George Mason University in Fairfax, Va. Its analysis was an outgrowth of a controversial congressional report that Wegman headed in 2006.  The "Wegman Report" suggested climate scientists colluded in their studies and questioned whether global warming was real. The report has since become a touchstone among climate change naysayers.
The journal publisher's legal team "has decided to retract the study," said CSDA journal editor Stanley Azen of the University of Southern California, following complaints of plagiarism. A November  review by three plagiarism experts of the 2006 congressional report for USA TODAY also concluded that portions contained text from Wikipedia and textbooks. The journal study, co-authored by Wegman student Yasmin Said, detailed part of the congressional report's analysis.
"Neither Dr. Wegman nor Dr. Said has ever engaged in plagiarism," says their attorney, Milton Johns, by e-mail. In a March 16 e-mail to the journal, Wegman blamed a student who "had basically copied and pasted" from others' work into the 2006 congressional report, and said the text was lifted without acknowledgment and used in the journal study. "We would never knowingly publish plagiarized material" wrote Wegman, a former CSDA journal editor.
Plagiarism can result in research sanctions from federal funding authorities, says federal Office of Research Integrity's John Dahlberg. He would not say whether ORI was investigating the researchers.
The congressional report, requested by global warming skeptic Rep. Joe Barton, R-Texas, and the study concluded that climate scientists favorably publish one another's work because of too-close collaboration. They suggested this led to the consensus that the Earth is warming.
A 2009 National Academy of Sciences report found that climate studies show average global temperatures have increased 1.4 degrees in the past century, for example.
The  study  concluded that top scientists shouldn't collaborate. Instead, studies where a "principal author tends to co-author papers with younger colleagues who were his students"  would produce less-biased results. Barton reiterated his support for the report last fall.
Computer scientist Ted Kirkpatrick of Canada's Simon Fraser University, filed a complaint with the journal after reading the climate science website Deep Climate, which first noted plagiarism in the Wegman Report in 2009. "There is something beyond ironic about a study of the conduct of science having ethics problems," Kirkpatrick says.
Azen says the study seemed novel and important at a time when social networking studies were "hot." Johns says his clients "stand by their work" despite the retraction.
George Mason University said in 2010 that it was investigating the charges of plagiarism. University spokesman Dan Walsch says the study retraction was a "personnel matter" and declined to comment. 




All pain, no gain





Not too long ago, President Obama and his Democratic allies in Congress proudly announced that America would lead the fight against global warming by passing a cap-and-trade bill. But despite overwhelming majorities in both houses of Congress in 2009, Democrats barely found the votes to get the proposal through the House, and Senate Democrats never even brought it up for a vote.
The reason is simple. Cap-and-trade is designed to make the energy we use more expensive. Consider President Obama's Energy Secretary Steven Chu, who said in 2008, "Somehow, we have to figure out how to boost the price of gasoline to the levels in Europe." That's about $7 to $8 a gallon.
What the Democrats have since learned is that the American public is more skeptical of the science of global warming than at anytime over the past decade. Frank Newport of  Gallup stated earlier this year, "Americans' attitudes toward the environment show a public that over the last two years has become less worried about the threat of global warming, less convinced that its effects are already happening, and more likely to believe that scientists themselves are uncertain about its occurrence."
While skepticism abounds, Americans are fully aware of the impact on  their wallets. The Obama cap-and-trade agenda would cost our economy $300 billion to $400 billion annually: It would hurt families, business and farmers  basically anyone who drives a car and flips a light switch.
What would be gained from higher gas prices and staggering taxes? Virtually nothing. Environmental Protection Agency Administrator Lisa Jackson, appointed by President Obama, admitted before the Senate that the U.S. action on global warming would have no impact on global carbon emissions. In fact, as jobs went to places like India, China and Mexico, where they don't have any emissions requirements, cap-and-trade would actually increase worldwide emissions.
For the past 10 years, I have led the fight against the Democrats' attack on affordable energy. This year, 64 senators voted to rein in the Obama administration as it attempts to push its cap-and-trade agenda through EPA regulations. In the end, as the hysteria of global warming continues to fade, so too will the cap-and-trade regime.
Sen. Jim Inhofe, R-Okla., is the senior Republican on the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee. 



Latest climate change report puts deniers on the hot seat




One way to deal with a problem is to pretend it doesn't exist. This approach has the virtue of relieving you from having to come up with a solution, spend money or make tough choices. The downside, of course, is that leaky faucets and other problems rarely solve themselves and, in fact, usually get worse if ignored.
Such is the case with climate change, a threat that too many members of Congress, most of them Republicans, have decided to manage by denying the science. That head-in-the-sand approach avoids messy discussions of higher energy prices, but it just got harder to justify.
Late last week, the nation's pre-eminent scientific advisory group, the National Research Council arm of the National Academy of Sciences, issued a report called "America's Climate Choices." As scientific reports go, its key findings were straightforward and unequivocal: "Climate change is occurring, is very likely caused primarily by human activities, and poses significant risks to humans and the environment." Among those risks in the USA: more intense and frequent heat waves, threats to coastal communities from rising sea levels, and greater drying of the arid Southwest.
Coincidentally, USA TODAY's Dan Vergano reported Monday, a statistics journal retracted a federally funded study that had become a touchstone among climate-change deniers. The retraction followed complaints of plagiarism and use of unreliable sources, such as Wikipedia.
Taken together, these developments ought to leave the deniers in the same position as the "birthers," who continue to challenge President Obama's American citizenship  a vocal minority that refuses to accept overwhelming evidence.
The Climate Choices report didn't generate big headlines because its conclusions aren't new; they are consistent with the scientific consensus about global warming. That consensus acknowledges some uncertainty in the extent to which climate change is the result of human activity, and how bad global warming will be if nothing is done.
Even so, as the report says, "uncertainly is not a reason for inaction," and the most effective national response to climate change would be to "substantially reduce greenhouse gas emissions."
If the deniers want a more legitimate basis for resistance, it is this: Even bold and costly national U.S. actions to limit greenhouse gases will be ineffective unless developing nations also curb their emissions. It's hard to imagine China and India acting, however, if the U.S. doesn't lead.
The Climate Choices report, requested by Congress, suggests investing in clean-energy technology, looking for ways to mitigate and adapt to climate change, and  most important  putting a price on carbon dioxide emissions. "Cap-and-trade," a complex but proven way to use market forces to reduce pollution, passed the House in 2009. Like health care reform, though, it has become so unpopular in GOP circles that at the first Republican presidential debate this month, former Minnesota governor Tim Pawlenty abjectly apologized for once supporting the idea. "I've said I was wrong," Pawlenty groveled. "It was a mistake, and I'm sorry."
For now, his party's rejectionist stance is unrivaled among major political parties, including conservative ones, around the warming planet. The latest scientific report provides clarity that denial isn't just a river in Egypt. It paves a path to a future fraught with melting ice caps, rising sea levels, shifting agricultural patterns, droughts and wildfires.
Leaky faucets, indeed. 




Worries about gas prices, jobs overshadow climate change




After reading Tuesday's  edition of USA TODAY, I wondered whether your editorial staff  reads the rest of the paper. The front page covers chronic unemployment and high gas prices that are hurting Americans, while the editorial page promotes "cap and trade" to fight global warming ("Latest climate change report puts deniers on the hot seat," Global warming debate, Tuesday).
As someone who has worked in the trucking industry for 30 years, I can tell you  that  Environmental Protection Agency-mandated emission changes have reduced  truck fuel mileage and  made new trucks more expensive. Add that to diesel prices above $4  a gallon,  and there is little wonder why we have high unemployment and pain at the pump. It simply has  become too expensive to do business in the USA, so business moves elsewhere.
Regardless of your beliefs on whether global warming exists,  the reality is that cap-and-trade  will force more business out of the country and lead to even higher energy prices. It is tough to get too concerned about the possibility of climate change when you are unemployed and cannot afford gas.
Andy Davis
Lebanon, Tenn.
Human actions not at fault
I'm just a normal, everyday American who believes that there is climate change. However, it is ludicrous to think that man has anything to do with it.
If you need proof, check and see when the glaciers  started receding. They began to do so before the Industrial Revolution.
All this environmental hysteria has caused the loss of manufacturing and new power plants, led to ridiculous regulations such as the banning of an inhaler because it might affect the ozone layer,  and the transfer  of jobs from the USA to other nations where greenhouse gases are not a factor.
Wake up, America, before we become a second-tier country, suffocated by a fictitious theory.
James V. Kelso III
Peachtree City, Ga.
Facts are ignored
A just-released report on climate change  says the longer we wait to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, the worse things will get.
In a world where reason, facts and expertise actually played a role in American politics, such a study would have a seismic effect on our Congress. Legislators would move to incorporate its recommendations into law, providing companies with governmental incentives to shrink  carbon footprints, providing states with funding to develop programs of their own, and honoring individuals who developed new strategies for environmentally conscious energy usage.
Why, if we lived in such a world, the  National Research Council (NRC) report could make an enormous difference in all our lives.
Unfortunately, in the world we inhabit, logic and  facts are political anathema, and the NRC study will likely join other similar studies in the congressional dustbin. And the Earth will get  hotter and hotter.
Warren Senders
Medford, Mass. 




2010 saw record fossil fuel emissions; Economist calls latest numbers 'a wake-up call'





Worldwide carbon-dioxide emissions from burning fossil fuels reached a record 30.6 billion metric tons  in 2010, an international energy group reports.
A reviving world economy was behind the 5% increase from 2008, mainly led by China's and India's growing industries, says the International Energy Agency, based in Paris. Hopes of dampening global warming  are dropping with such increases, the agency warned.
"Our latest estimates are another wake-up call," said IEA economist Fatih Birol, in a  statement. Emissions  dropped slightly in 2009, following the previous record year.
"It is, I guess, remarkable how quickly emissions have rebounded following the recession," says climate scientist Myles Allen of the United Kingdom's Oxford University.
Despite hopes that the global recession could lead to more efficient and lower-emission energy use, he adds, "That seems to have been wishful thinking."
In May, a report from the U.S. National Research Council warned that "the risk of dangerous climate change impacts is growing with every ton of greenhouse gases."
Sea-level rise, heat waves and drought in Southwestern states could follow, the report warned.
Greenhouse gases, most notably carbon dioxide, raise atmospheric temperatures because they are transparent to sunlight but trap heat. Atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide have risen about 23% since 1958, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
The IEA complained in its report that future emissions increases are "locked in" due to already-built fossil-fuel-burning power plants. That will drive global average temperature increases of more than 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit, by the end of the century, the report says.
"We can't say  for sure that temperatures will increase that much," cautions climate analyst Steven Smith of the Joint Global Change Research Institute in College Park, Md. "What we can say is that higher emissions raise the probability of higher temperatures." 




Solar plans pit green vs. green; Renewable energy projects could threaten species, habitat





Plans to create huge solar energy plants in the deserts of California, Arizona, Nevada and elsewhere in the West are pitting one green point of view vs. another.
Janine Blaeloch, executive director of the Western Lands Project, a non-profit group that examines the impacts of government land privatization, supports developing America's renewable energy sources but says fields of mirrors along miles of open desert isn't the way to do it. "These plants will introduce a huge amount of damage to our public land and habitat," she said.
On the other side are people such as Johanna Wald, director of the Natural Resources Defense Council's land program, who supports the idea and its potential to curb climate change. "There's no free lunch when it comes to meeting our energy needs," she said. "To get energy, we need to do things that will have impacts."
In April, U.S. Energy Secretary Steven Chu announced $2.1 billion in federal loan guarantees for a 1,000-megawatt solar farm proposal near Blythe, Calif. Another solar plant in development, Ivanpah in California's San Bernardino County, received $1.37 billion in federal loan guarantees in February. "California is the national leader in clean energy, and our great state is poised to become the world leader in renewable energy generation," Democratic Gov. Jerry Brown said.
Already-disturbed lands such as brownfield sites or former agricultural fields  and residential and commercial rooftops  would make better locations for solar panels, critics say.
"The irony is, in the name of saving the planet, we're casting aside 30 or 40 years of environmental law. It's really a type of frenzy," said Christine Hersey, a solar analyst at Wedbush Securities, a major U.S. securities firm and investment bank
State and federal regulators have approved 11 major solar projects in Southern California and Nevada since last year, California Energy Commission and federal Bureau of Land Management records show. All but three of the plans utilize largely undeveloped public land overseen by the federal Bureau of Land Management.
The projects are supposed to generate about 4,200 megawatts of power, enough electricity to power nearly 2.8 million homes, and nearly 7,000 jobs, according to federal estimates.
More than a dozen other utility-scale solar projects are in the permitting pipeline in California, Nevada and Arizona, according to California Energy Commission and federal Bureau of Land Management records. Federal agencies are considering plans that could open up 21.5 million more public acres to solar development in six Western states.
The open deserts are  prime habitat for threatened plants and animals, including the endangered desert tortoise, whose population has declined 90% since the 1980s in parts of its Mojave Desert range, which includes areas planned for solar development, said Kristin Berry, a leading desert tortoise researcher for the U.S. Geological Survey in California.
On April 15, the U.S. Department of the Interior suspended many construction activities at the Ivanpah solar facility after workers encountered far more desert tortoises than anticipated.
The desert solar projects also threaten thousands of sites important to Native Americans. On Dec. 27, La Cuna de Aztlan Sacred Sites Protection Circle, a non-profit group, sued federal agencies and four solar projects, alleging they didn't follow environmental laws and failed to adequately consult tribes.
La Cuna is dedicated to protecting the Blythe Giant Intaglios  ground drawings of humans, animals and shapes also known as geoglyphs left by native people in some cases centuries ago.
Though the desert may not mean much to the majority of people, "to us, it means everything," said Alfredo Figueroa, 73, founder of La Cuna.
Bureau of Land Management archaeologist Rolla Queen said no geoglyphs identified by Figueroa will be affected by the solar projects, but tribal members cite the sacred importance of the entire region.
"Let's say I want to build a McDonald's in Vatican Square, and I'll mitigate and provide land to make up for the space I use," said Charles Wood, chairman of the Chemehuevi tribe  in San Bernardino County. "What part of the Vatican is sacred to you? Is it just the cathedral or is it the entire grounds? Now you start to understand the  concerns we have."
There's much greater value in helping the whole society,  counters Kenneth Zweibel, director of the George Washington University Solar Institute in Washington. "Something you are trying to protect is being changed, but it's helping so much in terms of climate change, energy self-sufficiency and clean energy; it's a sacrifice that's appropriate to take."
Matheny also reports for The Desert Sun in Palm Springs, Calif. 




GOP's purity police undermine deals to solve nation's problems; OUR VIEW: Candidates face rigid orthoodoxy




The biggest obstacle facing former Massachusetts governor Mitt Romney, who formally entered the race for the Republican presidential nomination on Thursday, is that President Obama's health care overhaul closely resembles Romney's state law.
For former Minnesota governor Tim Pawlenty, a major roadblock is his past support, since recanted, for "cap and trade" legislation to fight global warming.
For former Utah governor Jon Huntsman, the rap is that he is too close to Obama because he served until recently as U.S. ambassador to China.
And for former House speaker Newt Gingrich, the near-fatal error was to attack a House-passed plan to turn Medicare into a voucher program.
All these GOP aspirants are in hot water with conservative activists because  they ran afoul of a rigid orthodoxy that will make it harder for a Republican to retake the White House and more difficult to solve the nation's problems.
Many of these activists are sure of many things  that Obama is a bad president, that man-made global warming is a myth, that health insurance mandates are unconstitutional, that Medicare should be privatized for future retirees, and that taxes should never be raised.
But in choosing their presidential nominee, uncertainty rules. Recent polls show that no candidate has consistently maintained the support of even one out of five GOP voters. Many of these polls also show dissatisfaction with the field.
While these two trends might seem divergent, they are actually related. The misgivings that many Republicans have about the candidates are a direct outgrowth of their certainty on issues.
By any objective measure, the GOP field has some impressive public servants. In a previous era, the party would begin coalescing around one. In the current environment, however, many of them, including potentially the strongest challengers to Obama, are being punished for past positions by party activists intent on litmus tests.
To be sure, Democrats have been known to have their own litmus tests, on issues ranging from abortion to the Iraq war. The GOP activists have every right to press their beliefs, and America benefits from having a credible movement for smaller government. But the nation also benefits from having two, broad-based parties whose leaders are able to address issues with  bipartisan give-and-take  and without fear of being demonized for compromise.
The most pressing of these issues is the soaring national debt. Yet the three Republican senators of the so-called Gang of Six that is trying to reach a deficit reduction deal have faced withering criticism from a group that opposes any tax hike under any circumstance. One senator, Oklahoma's Tom Coburn, decided to drop out. (Democrats in the gang, notably Sen. Richard Durbin of Illinois, have taken flak from the left for agreeing to cuts in benefits, but not at the same intensity level.)
Ultimately, the best measure for how off-kilter things have gotten in the GOP is Ronald Reagan. The party faithful regard him as a great president. But some of his policies would be unacceptable to today's purity police.
Reagan fought hard for conservative principles, but he knew when to cut deals, including one that saved Social Security. He raised taxes 11 times.  And in Reagan's eight years in office, government spending was never less than 21.3% of the economy, well above the 18% that many of today's GOP leaders insist should be the maximum.
For these reasons, we suggest the activists cut the GOP field some slack. If they don't, they risk leading their party where Republican Barry Goldwater did in 1964 and Democrat George McGovern did in 1972: off an ideological cliff. 




The flooding The tornadoes The wildfires; 'Wild and weird' weather pattern leaves its mark across the USA





Monster tornadoes, historic floods, massive wildfires and widespread drought: Springtime has delivered a wallop of weather-related destruction and misery across much of the nation this year. And it may all be related.
Never mind the debate over global warming, its possible causes and effects. We've got "global weirding."
That's how climatologist Bill Patzert describes the wide range of deadly weather effects that have whipped the nation this year, killing hundreds of people and doing billions of dollars in damage to homes, businesses, schools and churches.
"Sometimes it gets wild and weird," says Patzert, a research scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif.
In more technical terms, weather forecasters searching for a unifying explanation point to the La Nia climate pattern, a phenomenon born far out in the Pacific Ocean that shapes weather across the globe, in combination with other atmospheric anomalies that have altered the jet stream flow of air across North America.
Less famous than its warm-water climate sibling El Nio, this year's La Nia has been "near record-breaking" in its intensity, says climate scientist Michelle L'Heureux of the Climate Prediction Center in Camp Springs, Md.
La Nia is defined as cooler-than-normal sea-surface temperatures in the central and eastern tropical Pacific Ocean, which affect weather patterns around the world, according to the prediction center. La Nia conditions occur every few years and can persist for as long as two years.
"A lot of what is going on is consistent with a La Nia," says Steve Bowen, a meteorologist who tracks weather disasters at AON Corp., a  global insurance broker.
"As of today, the U.S. has seen eight separate billion-dollar (weather) events," Bowen says. "This is one shy of the record nine separate billion-dollar events set in 2008."
So far, Bowen says the Mississippi Valley flooding is about a $5 billion disaster, while the Joplin, Mo., tornado may end up being "one of the costliest single tornadoes ever recorded."
Based on measurements of air pressure differences, another way of measuring La Nia besides sea-surface temperatures, this La Nia in February was the most intense on record. Accurate measurements go back to 1950.
"During the winter and early spring, La Nia is typically associated with a pattern of drier-than-average conditions across the southern United States," L'Heureux says.
"During the winter and spring, we have certainly seen that pattern, with dry conditions observed across parts of Arizona, New Mexico, Texas and parts of the Southeast."
Massive flooding on the Mississippi
El Nio, La Nia's opposite , is a periodic warming of central Pacific Ocean water that usually brings powerful winter storms to California and a very wet winter to the southern United States.
This spring's weather has brought extremes, sometimes in places where it's not expected.
Flooding on the Mississippi River has reached levels not seen since 1927, although flooding is hardly unexpected there. Tornadoes whipped the Southeast, killing hundreds in Alabama, Mississippi and other states, and blasted through the familiar Tornado Alley regions of of the lower Midwest and Plains. Twisters also whipped Massachusetts, where they are not unheard-of but usually arrive in the heat of summer if at all.
And in this interconnected age, weather disruptions ripple broadly.
U.S. airlines' on-time performance deteriorated sharply in April as severe storms shut down major hubs, delaying nearly a quarter of all domestic flights, according to federal data released Tuesday. Only 75% of flights arrived on time, down from 85% a year ago, says the Air Travel Consumer Report from the Deaprtment of Transportation's Bureau of Transportation Statistics.
Flight cancellations were way up, too. More than 10,100 flights out of a half-million scheduled were called off. That was more than twice the cancellations of April 2010.
"We attributed the downturn in on-time performance and the spike in cancellations to the weather pattern that spawned tornadoes in the South and Midwest and thunderstorms in the Northeast," says David White of FlightStats, which monitors air traffic.
In California, the weird weather followed a severe winter that left mountain snowpack  the source of much of the state's water  at record levels. A cool spring has delayed the snowmelt and could bring floods in the San Joaquin Valley , Patzert warns.
"We're not done with this yet," he says. "And (the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration) is forecasting a busier-than-normal huricane season."
Because of extreme dryness, wildfires have scorched 3.5 million acres so far this year, according to the National Interagency Fire Center in Boise, Idaho. That is more than triple the average and represents the highest total acres burned in the past decade. Most of the fires have been in the Southwest: Arizona, New Mexico and Texas.
According to the most recent U.S. Drought Monitor, drought conditions exist across much of the southern tier of the nation from Arizona to Georgia. In hardest-hit states, the drought is almost inescapable; 94% of New Mexico and 96% of Texas are suffering from drought.
San Antonio recorded only 0.88 inch of rain this spring (March-May), the city's second-driest such period since 1885. In Florida, West Palm Beach reported its driest water-year to date (Oct. 1, 2010, to May 30, 2011) since 1850, with a mere 10.39 inches of rain reported in a city that averages 33.09 inches of rain during that period, according to the National Weather Service.
"La Nia years tend to bring more tornadoes than average. This year there have been 525 people killed  the most since accurate records began in 1950  and a preliminary total of 1,438 tornadoes spotted. Normally, at this point in the year, an average of 823 tornadoes have formed across the USA.
Storm Prediction Center director Russell Schneider says La Nia has helped trigger  strong jet stream winds that have mixed warm, humid air at lower levels of the atmosphere with relatively cool air at upper levels. This helps create the supercell thunderstorms that spawn tornadoes.
"There is a very good argument to be made that the La Nia contributed to dry and wet conditions in these regions and associated impacts," L'Heureux says.
"What is impressive to me is the geographical extent of the extremes during this La Nia event and how the expected wet and dry conditions have been so pronounced.  Taken all together, it really has been an impressive winter-spring for climate impacts across the United States."
Weather 'on steroids'
Patzert says the La Nina conditions are "one of the strongest we've seen in perhaps the last half-century," but contributing factors in the atmosphere also play a role.
Greatest among them: a weakening, or oscillation, in the normal vortex pattern of air that circles the North Pole, which has allowed more cold air than usual to flow outward, bringing cold polar air blasts starting in December and continuing now.
That contributed to the heavy snowpack in the California Sierras and Rocky Muntains, tough winters for much of the Midwest and Northeast, and the water that now courses through the Mississippi and other rivers at near-record levels.
The combination of cold northern air hitting warmer southern air, intensified by moisture from the Gulf of Mexico, was a recipe for tornadoes, aggravated by stronger-than-usual jet stream flows where those air masses meet, Patzert says.
"All the ingredients were hiked  on steroids," he says.
Fortunately, this La Nia climate pattern appears to be waning, as Pacific Ocean temperatures return to average over the next few months, L'Heureux reports.
That's a good thing, too, as a strong La Nia also tends to boost the number and ferocity of Atlantic hurricanes.
Unusual and severe weather always raises questions about whether global warming, the slow rise in world temperatures, whether natural or caused by humans, is to blame.
"It would be irresponsible to say that," Patzert says. "Nobody knows."



La Nina; 'Wild and weird' weather pattern leaves its mark across the USA





Monster tornadoes, historic floods, massive wildfires and widespread drought: Springtime has delivered a wallop of weather-related destruction and misery across much of the nation this year. And it may all be related.
Never mind the debate over global warming, its possible causes and effects. We've got "global weirding."
That's how climatologist Bill Patzert describes the wide range of deadly weather that has whipped the nation this year, killing hundreds of people and doing billions of dollars in damage to homes, businesses, schools and churches.
"Sometimes it gets wild and weird," says Patzert, a research scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif.
In more technical terms, weather forecasters searching for a unifying explanation point to the La Nia climate pattern, a phenomenon born far out in the Pacific Ocean that shapes weather across the globe, in combination with other atmospheric anomalies that have altered the jet stream flow of air across North America.
Less famous than its warm-water climate sibling, El Nio, this year's La Nia has been "near record-breaking" in its intensity, says climate scientist Michelle L'Heureux of the Climate Prediction Center in Camp Springs, Md.
La Nia is defined as cooler-than-normal sea-surface temperatures in the central and eastern tropical Pacific Ocean, which affect weather patterns around the world, according to the prediction center. La Nia conditions occur every few years and can persist for as long as two years.
"A lot of what is going on is consistent with a La Nia," says Steve Bowen, a meteorologist who tracks weather disasters at AON Corp., a  global insurance broker.
"As of today, the U.S. has seen eight separate billion-dollar (weather) events," Bowen says. "This is one shy of the record nine separate billion-dollar events set in 2008."
So far, Bowen says the Mississippi Valley flooding is about a $5 billion disaster, while the Joplin, Mo., tornado may end up being "one of the costliest single tornadoes ever recorded."
Based on measurements of air pressure differences, another way of measuring La Nia besides sea-surface temperatures, this La Nia in February was the most intense on record. Accurate measurements go back to 1950.
"During the winter and early spring, La Nia is typically associated with a pattern of drier-than-average conditions across the southern United States," L'Heureux says.
"During the winter and spring, we have certainly seen that pattern, with dry conditions observed across parts of Arizona, New Mexico, Texas and parts of the Southeast."
Massive flooding on the Mississippi
El Nio, La Nia's opposite , is a periodic warming of central Pacific Ocean water that usually brings powerful winter storms to California and a very wet winter to the southern United States.
This spring's weather has brought extremes, sometimes in places where it's not expected.
Flooding on the Mississippi River has reached levels not seen since 1927, although flooding is hardly unexpected there. Tornadoes whipped the Southeast, killing hundreds in Alabama, Mississippi and other states, and blasted through the familiar Tornado Alley regions of of the lower Midwest and Plains. Twisters also whipped Massachusetts, where they are not unheard-of but usually arrive in the heat of summer if at all.
And in this interconnected age, weather disruptions ripple broadly.
U.S. airlines' on-time performance deteriorated sharply in April as severe storms shut down major hubs, delaying nearly a quarter of all domestic flights, according to federal data released Tuesday. Only 75% of flights arrived on time, down from 85% a year ago, says the Air Travel Consumer Report from the Deaprtment of Transportation's Bureau of Transportation Statistics.
Flight cancellations were way up, too. More than 10,100 flights out of a half-million scheduled were called off. That was more than twice the cancellations of April 2010.
"We attributed the downturn in on-time performance and the spike in cancellations to the weather pattern that spawned tornadoes in the South and Midwest and thunderstorms in the Northeast," says David White of FlightStats, which monitors air traffic.
In California, the weird weather followed a severe winter that left mountain snowpack  the source of much of the state's water  at record levels. A cool spring has delayed the snowmelt and could bring floods in the San Joaquin Valley , Patzert warns.
"We're not done with this yet," he says. "And (the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration) is forecasting a busier-than-normal huricane season."
Because of extreme dryness, wildfires have scorched 3.5 million acres so far this year, according to the National Interagency Fire Center in Boise, Idaho. That is more than triple the average and represents the highest total acres burned in the past decade. Most of the fires have been in the Southwest: Arizona, New Mexico and Texas.
According to the most recent U.S. Drought Monitor, drought conditions exist across much of the southern tier of the nation from Arizona to Georgia. In hardest-hit states, the drought is almost inescapable; 94% of New Mexico and 96% of Texas are suffering from drought.
San Antonio recorded only 0.88 inch of rain this spring (March-May), the city's second-driest such period since 1885. In Florida, West Palm Beach reported its driest water-year to date (Oct. 1, 2010, to May 30, 2011) since 1850, with a mere 10.39 inches of rain reported in a city that averages 33.09 inches of rain during that period, according to the National Weather Service.
"La Nia years tend to bring more tornadoes than average. This year there have been 525 people killed  the most since accurate records began in 1950  and a preliminary total of 1,438 tornadoes spotted. Normally, at this point in the year, an average of 823 tornadoes have formed across the USA.
Storm Prediction Center director Russell Schneider says La Nia has helped trigger  strong jet stream winds that have mixed warm, humid air at lower levels of the atmosphere with relatively cool air at upper levels. This helps create the supercell thunderstorms that spawn tornadoes.
"There is a very good argument to be made that the La Nia contributed to dry and wet conditions in these regions and associated impacts," L'Heureux says.
"What is impressive to me is the geographical extent of the extremes during this La Nia event and how the expected wet and dry conditions have been so pronounced.  Taken all together, it really has been an impressive winter-spring for climate impacts across the United States."
Weather 'on steroids'
Patzert says the La Nina conditions are "one of the strongest we've seen in perhaps the last half-century," but contributing factors in the atmosphere also play a role.
Greatest among them: a weakening, or oscillation, in the normal vortex pattern of air that circles the North Pole, which has allowed more cold air than usual to flow outward, bringing cold polar air blasts starting in December and continuing now.
That contributed to the heavy snowpack in the California Sierras and Rocky Muntains, tough winters for much of the Midwest and Northeast, and the water that now courses through the Mississippi and other rivers at near-record levels.
The combination of cold northern air hitting warmer southern air, intensified by moisture from the Gulf of Mexico, was a recipe for tornadoes, aggravated by stronger-than-usual jet stream flows where those air masses meet, Patzert says.
"All the ingredients were hiked  on steroids," he says.
Fortunately, this La Nia climate pattern appears to be waning, as Pacific Ocean temperatures return to average over the next few months, L'Heureux reports.
That's a good thing, too, as a strong La Nia also tends to boost the number and ferocity of Atlantic hurricanes.
Unusual and severe weather always raises questions about whether global warming, the slow rise in world temperatures, whether natural or caused by humans, is to blame.
"It would be irresponsible to say that," Patzert says. "Nobody knows." 



Study of northern Rocky snowpack indicates drier future; Climate change shifts patterns





Northern Rocky Mountain snowpack levels over the past five decades are sharply down compared with the past eight centuries, federal researchers reported Thursday.
Despite this year's wet weather replenishing mountain snow, the finding suggests drier times are ahead for the West. In particular, the northern Rockies' snowpack feeds the Columbia, Colorado and Missouri rivers, now the primary water sources for 70 million people.
The historical snowpack reconstruction results, dating to the year 1200 and released by the journal Science, suggest that global warming has broken the normal seesaw pattern of snowpack in the region, in which a down year in the northern Rockies will be offset by a higher snow year in the southern Rockies.
Overall, the average yearly snowpack across the northern Rockies  directly known from snow records to have dropped 30% to 60% in the past 50 years  has fallen  more sharply in that time than for  any period in the past 800 years, the study shows.
"Temperature is the driver here," says study lead author Greg Pederson of the U.S. Geological Survey's Northern Rocky Mountain Science Center in Bozeman, Mont. "It doesn't take a rocket scientist to know that if temperatures get warmer, snow and ice melt sooner."
In the study, researchers used 66 collections of federal tree growth-ring records gathered across Western states to reconstruct year-to-year snowpack sizes. Trees grow every year to an extent that depends on water. By comparing growth rings from large numbers of dead and living trees, the study scientists developed a record of how much water was available, an amount driven by snowpack, going as far back as about 1200.
"The most important part is this puts the observations of snowpack declines we've seen for a while into the long-term picture," says atmospheric scientist Philip Mote of Oregon State University in Corvallis, who was not part of the study team.
"We can now say the decline really hasn't happened before and now we have tens of millions of people depending on the snowpack for water," Mote says.
In 2009, the U.S. Global Change Research Program estimated average temperatures have risen 1.5 degrees Fahrenheit in the Northwest, over the past century.
Water melts at 32 degrees, and small shifts in temperature can drive widespread early melting of the snow that yearly refills rivers, Pederson says, leaving less for summer months.
The Northern Rockies stretch from Washington state to Montana. The study records show two-decade-long drops in snowpack across the northern Rockies in the 1300s and 1500s that resemble the decline seen in the 20th century, but those declines lasted for shorter periods of time and came when far fewer people were dependent on the snowpack.
"Water demand, as much as supply, is the problem," Pederson says. "We have a lot of fisheries and hydropower relying on this water as well." 



Slow starters heating up





The weather is warming up. Conventional wisdom suggests that seasonal climate change signals the beginning of each year's peak production period.
How so? Players have gotten into their grooves. Statistical anomalies have washed out. Scouting reports have made the rounds.  It's all circumstantial. There is little evidence that warm weather is a panacea for  early strugglers.
Still, we can  pick a handful of slow starters who might be able to sustain their recent hot streaks.
Jorge Posada of the New York Yankees got off to a horrendous start, hitting .132 in April and .219 in May. However, he has been on fire since June 5, going 13-for-22 over six games, a .591 clip.
Given that the Yankees participated in slugfests against the Boston Red Sox and the slumping Cleveland Indians during that stretch, we probably should discount Posada's recent streak a bit. Still, as a lifetime .275 hitter coming into 2011, his current .226 batting average probably has further upside.
Last year's fantasy MVP, Carlos Gonzalez of the Colorado Rockies, also started slow. He batted .228 with one home run in April, which was at least partially the result of a bout with the flu.
Gonzalez started turning it around in mid-May. Over the last 31 days, he has hit .333 with six home runs, which puts him right back at his MVP-caliber pace.
The Pittsburgh Pirates' Andrew McCutchen came into the season with high expectations and was an early-round draft pick in most fantasy leagues. But a .219 April put a damper on things.
McCutchen has recovered  by hitting .359 over the last 31 days, with three home runs and six stolen bases.  Projections at BaseballHQ.com put him on pace for 22 home runs and 28 stolen bases.
Brett Gardner was given a vote of confidence at the beginning of the season by being installed as the Yankees' leadoff hitter against right-handers. He responded by hitting .135 through the first three weeks of the season.
Gardner has thrived since being returned to the bottom of the order. He batted .301 in May and is batting .414 in June. He is on pace to nearly match last year's numbers.
Analysts suspected that  Houston Astros first baseman Carlos Lee, 34, might be entering the decline phase of his career after he hit a career-low .246 with 24 homers in 2010. That expectation was reinforced by his .194 average this April. Since then, Lee  batted .316 in May, .327 over the last 31 days and .474 this past week.
Ron Shandler is the founder of BaseballHQ.com 



Huntsman's bid puts record up for review; GOP hopeful has been at odds with his party





Former ambassador to China Jon Huntsman has spent the weeks leading up to his presidential announcement frequently characterizing his role in the Obama administration as a call to duty.
Still, it may take more than  explaining that he worked for a Democratic president for him to secure the Republican nomination.
Today, less than two months after leaving his post in China, Huntsman will officially announce his presidential bid. That  will further increase scrutiny of  his record as Utah governor from 2004 to 2009, during which he took positions that are at odds with many Republicans on such issues, as climate change, civil unions and the federal government stimulus package.
Huntsman used a speech last month at the University of South Carolina commencement to explain why he joined the Obama administration. Huntsman encouraged graduates to serve their country if asked.
"I was, by a president of a different political party," he said.
While some on the right still question that decision, most are turning to his record as governor of Utah.
Rep. Jason Chaffetz, R-Utah, who was Huntsman's 2004 campaign manager, said Huntsman campaigned that year as more conservative than he turned out to be as governor.
"It will be interesting to see what sort of platform he will come up with in his run for the presidency," Chaffetz said.
In December 2008, Huntsman sought money from what became the  federal stimulus plan, which won only three Republican votes in Congress. Huntsman said at the time  the money would pay for projects that could create 124,000 jobs in Utah.
Last month, Huntsman told ABC News that he did not regret taking stimulus funds but thought the bill lacked the focus on infrastructure projects and corporate tax cuts that would "improve (the)  economic future."
The stimulus "was not properly focused around that which would really stimulate the economy," Huntsman said.
Chris Chocola, a Republican former congressman  from Indiana and now head of the conservative Club for Growth, called Huntsman's willingness to take more government funds and initial comments that more federal funds should be committed to the stimulus a "red flag."
"He took the money and didn't even kind of pretend he didn't want it," Chocola said. "Regardless of what the stimulus was made up of, thinking you need more of it from the government is not exactly a limited-government view."
Huntsman's  support for a February 2009 initiative to allow civil unions  in Utah,  which has a  ban on gay marriage in  the  constitution, also has raised eyebrows among conservatives.
Utah state Sen. John Valentine, who led the chamber  during Huntsman's tenure, said Huntsman's  civil unions record "is going to be tough for him in the Republican primaries."
"He never talked about it, that was sort of after he was clearly on his way out that he made that announcement," Valentine said.
Huntsman told ABC News' George Stephanopoulos that he believed in "traditional marriage" but that supporting civil unions was a "fairness issue."
He also has backed away from some of his previous positions.
As governor, Huntsman sought limits on greenhouse gases through a cap-and-trade plan, which would limit emissions by forcing companies to purchase credits if they exceed a set amount. In May, he told Time  he now is focused more on economic growth and that anything such as a cap-and-trade plan that might affect growth is off the table.
"Cap-and-trade ideas aren't working; it hasn't worked, and our economy's in a different place than five years ago," Huntsman said.
In 2007, Huntsman signed the Western  Climate Initiative, a memorandum of understanding among  governors from Western states to work to combat greenhouse gases. That agreement included a regional cap-and-trade plan.
Chocola said he is glad Huntsman has changed his mind on the cap-and-trade issue and noted Huntsman is not alone.
Former Minnesota governor Tim Pawlenty, another Republican presidential contender, now calls his former support of the plan "a mistake."
Many conservatives want to see how much of Huntsman's record as governor carries over to his presidential campaign, said Utah Sen. Mike Lee, a Republican who was  Huntsman's general counsel.
"It is not always the case that the positions that a person takes as governor will necessarily translate directly into their presidential campaign," Lee said.
List
Huntsman on the issues
Jon Huntsman not only served as President Obama's ambassador to China, but also his record as governor of Utah includes positions  at odds with those of Republicans in Congress and voters influential in GOP primaries. They include:
Climate change
Huntsman backed a program by Western states to limit greenhouse gases considered responsible for climate change through a cap-and-trade plan. Most Republicans oppose the measure as a tax increase and a job killer.
Huntsman recently said cap-and-trade did not work and he would not implement any proposal that could hurt job growth.
The 2009 federal stimulus program
As governor, Huntsman accepted federal funds from the federal stimulus plan. In late 2008, he said Utah had a variety of projects that cost a total of $14.4 billion. Spending that money on those projects could create 124,000 jobs in Utah, Huntsman said.
However, only three Senate Republicans and none in the House of Representatives voted for the stimulus plan approved by Congress in February 2009.
Civil unions
Huntsman backs civil unions for gay couples, calling it a fairness issue. Social conservatives oppose any moves to expand rights associated with traditional marriage to the gay and lesbian community. Utah state Sen. John Valentine said Huntsman's record may cause problems in the primaries.
By Jackie Kucinich 




Justices toss out greenhouse gas lawsuit





The Supreme Court on Monday tossed out a federal lawsuit brought by a group of states and New York City against five power plants over greenhouse gas emissions. The justices ruled unanimously  that the Clean Air Act, and authority of the Environmental Protection Agency, prevents states from asking federal judges to set limits on carbon emissions that the challengers say exacerbate global warming.
The decision reversed an appeals-court ruling that allowed the case against American Electric Power Co. and other utilities to go forward under federal common law of nuisance.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg said states must turn to the EPA, not look for "a parallel track" in U.S. court. She said the agency has rules underway for plant emissions. She said judges "lack the scientific, economic, and technological resources" on the issue.
The states had said EPA's promise of limits on emissions was insufficient and stressed the urgency of dealing with a problem causing increased smog, reduced crop yields and shrinking mountain snowpack. The states were Connecticut, New York, California, Iowa, Rhode Island and Vermont.
Justice Sonia Sotomayor, who until 2009 was a member of the lower appeals court, did not participate. 



Al Gore: Obama dropped ball on world climate crisis





The Democrats' leading environmental messenger, Al Gore, is declaring that President Obama has failed to lead on the issue of global warming.
In a 7,000-word essay posted online Wednesday by Rolling Stone magazine, Gore says the president hasn't stood up for "bold action" on the problem and has done little to move the country forward since he replaced Republican President George W. Bush.
Bush infuriated environmentalists by resisting mandatory controls on the pollution blamed for climate change, despite overwhelming scientific evidence that the burning of fossil fuels is responsible. The scientific case has only gotten stronger since, Gore argues, but Obama has not used it to force significant change.
"Obama has never presented to the American people the magnitude of the climate crisis," Gore says. "He has not defended the science against the ongoing withering and dishonest attacks."
Gore does credit Obama's political appointees with making hundreds of changes that have helped move the country "forward slightly" on the climate issue, but he says the president "has simply not made the case for action."
Gore is the second Clinton administration official this month to express disappointment with Obama on environmental issues. Former Interior secretary Bruce Babbitt, in a speech in early June, said Obama had yet to take up the "mantle of land and water conservation  in a significant way."
In a response from the White House, spokesman Clark Stevens said, "The president has been clear since Day One that climate change poses a threat domestically and globally, and under his leadership, we have taken the most aggressive steps in our country's history to tackle this challenge."
Gore's comments mark a turnaround for the global warming activist, whose work on the problem has earned him a Nobel Prize and was adapted into an Oscar-winning documentary.
Gore toasted Obama's inauguration with a "green" ball. He helped the White House press the House of Representatives to pass a global warming bill in 2009 that would have set the first-ever limits on the pollution blamed for global warming, a bill that died in the Democratic-controlled Senate. Gore also advised Obama before the president participated in international climate negotiations in 2009. Obama's last-minute appearance in Copenhagen helped win a non-binding deal to reduce greenhouse gases.
In the essay, Gore calls the Copenhagen result a "rhetorical agreement" that provided cover for the administration's inability to commit to enforceable targets for global-warming pollution. Without legislation, Obama couldn't follow through on his promises to cut emissions.
"During the final years of the Bush-Cheney administration, the rest of the world was waiting for a new president who would aggressively tackle the climate crisis, and when it became clear that there would be no real change from the Bush era, the agenda at Copenhagen changed from 'How do we complete this historic breakthrough?' to 'How can we paper over this embarrassing disappointment?'" Gore writes, referring to talks at which 193 nations drafted a global treaty to reduce greenhouse gases.
The 1997 Kyoto Protocol, which the U.S. signed onto when Gore was vice president, but the Senate refused to ratify, expires in 2012.
Gore declined a request for an interview. 




USA increasingly at risk for disease spread by mosquitoes




Dengue fever, malaria among illnesses that could be spread as world travel increases and climate change alters insect habitats, expert warns. 3A.
Best of the Road winners
Five teams traveled across the USA and found the most beautiful, most fun, friendliest, best for food and most patriotic towns. 4-5D.
Yellow Dot program is red-hot
The free program, which alerts first responders to a motorists' vital medical information,
generates huge interest across the nation. 3A.
GM confirms diesel version of Chevrolet Cruze for U.S.
Planned for 2013, it would be first Detroit
passenger-vehicle diesel since 2006 Jeep Liberty. Fuel economy likely in mid-40s, CEO says. 1B.
Hackers claim to have stolen cache of News Corp. e-mails
Archived e-mails could reveal if News Corp. executives knew of phone hacking. 1B.
Kick back and relax with a bounty of summer TV
Whether you like mysterious artifacts, "tongue-torching" foods or Hillbilly Handfishin', summer programming has something for everyone. 1D.
10 great bicycling cities
Sometimes, it can be the best way to get to know a place. 8D. 




Going meatless is good for you -- and for the planet





By now, many of you (50% of Americans, according to recent market research) have heard of Meatless Monday, the non-profit campaign that advocates a day off from meat for  health and the environment. The campaign, which got its start in 2003, is capturing the nation's attention, from school districts and legislatures to chefs and celebrities, including Oprah Winfrey. (It is also what inspired this columnist to write a similarly themed cookbook last year.)
A new report from The Environmental Working Group (EWG) is encouraging Americans to push things one step further and take a weekly break from cheese as well. Released last month, the EWG's Meat Eater's Guide to Climate Change and Health analyzed the farm-to-fork (and garbage can) carbon footprint of 20 kinds of protein from animals and plants alike.
In the No. 1 and No. 2 slots for environmental impact are lamb and beef (86.4 and 59.6 pounds of carbon dioxide equivalents for every 2.2 pounds consumed, respectively). But what took this cheese lover by surprise is the third-place carbon load of curds and whey (29.7 pounds of CO per 2.2 pounds eaten). That said, Kari Hamerschlag, author of the study, reminded me that the serving recommended by the U.S. Department of Agriculture is 1.5 ounces.
Whether or not you're ready to take a day off from meat and/or cheese, here's something we can all stand to do, vegetarians and meat eaters alike: Eat down our fridges and pantries before stocking the larder. "Waste was definitely one of the most surprising and important findings in the study," Hamerschlag says. The food we throw away accounts for an average of 20% of food-related emission, according to the report.
Meanwhile, join me for supper. These chickpea "crab cakes" are meat- and dairy-free but, more importantly, seriously good chow you can sink your teeth into (and won't ditch in the garbage).
---
Chickpea crab cakes'
Ingredients:
1 cup dried chickpeas, soaked for about 8hours and drained
1 cups yellow onion, roughly chopped (not quite 1 large onion)
2 cloves garlic, crushed
 cup fresh cilantro and/or parsley, roughly chopped
 tsp. baking powder
2 tsps. Old Bay seasoning
1/4 tsp. cayenne
 tsp. dry mustard
 tsp. salt
 tsp. ground black pepper
 cup vegetable oil
8 soft hamburger buns or English muffins
Method:
In a food processor, pulverize the soaked and drained
chickpeas using the "pulse" function until beans form a
paste that sticks together when you squeeze it in your
hand. Be careful not to overprocess; if it's too smooth, the
batter will fall apart when cooking.
Add the rest of the ingredients (except the oil) and combine
using the "pulse" function approximately 12 times;
batter will be somewhat grainy and speckled with herbs.
Shape into patties using a scantz-cup measure (for large)
or -cup measure (for sliders) and refrigerate until firm,
about 30 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 350F.
In a shallow 12-inch skillet, heatcup of the oil over
medium-high heat. Gently place the patties into the hot oil
in small batches and fry the first side until golden brown,
about3minutes.
Gently turn onto the second side and cook for an additional3minutes.
Transfer patties to a baking tray to finish
cooking in the oven for8minutes.
(Before frying the next batch, heat remaining oil.)
Serve on a bun with cocktail sauce or your favorite
condiment.
Servings: Makes 8 entre-size patties or 12 sliders
Nutrition per patty: 343 calories, 39g carbohydrates, 9g protein,
17g fat (2g saturated), 0mg cholesterol, 5g fiber, 542mg sodium
Source: From The Meat Lover's Meatless Cookbook by Kim O'Donnel. Excerpted by arrangement with Da Capo Lifelong,amember of the Perseus Books Group. Copyright2010. 



Jabs thrown at debate -- not all at Obama; GOP candidates try to separate themselves from each other





Former Minnesota governor Tim Pawlenty charged in a Republican presidential debate Thursday night that a leading rival, Minnesota Rep. Michele Bachmann, had a "non-existent" record of accomplishment in Congress.
"That's not going to be good enough for our candidate for president of the United States," he said.
Bachmann replied with a steely look accused Pawlenty of having sounded "a lot more like Barack Obama" during his tenure, support cap-and-trade legislation to combat global warming and health insurance mandates.
In contrast, she said she was "a fighter and the representative of the people."
The combative exchange opened a high-stakes debate that will play a role in the first contest of the battle for the GOP nomination, the Ames straw poll on Saturday.
Still, not every competitor was on the stage at Stephens Auditorium at Iowa State University. Missing was Texas Gov. Rick Perry, who placed second to former Massachusetts governor  Romney in a nationwide USA TODAY/Gallup Poll of Republicans last weekend.
Perry spokesman Mark Miner said the governor would make it clear in an appearance Saturday in South Carolina that he was jumping in the race.
Also on Saturday: The Ames straw poll, an Iowa GOP fundraising event that looms as the first contest for the GOP contenders in which voters actually cast ballots -- albeit at a carnival-like affair where their support is cultivated by offers of free barbecue and competing country bands.
The debate was considered critical for several of the candidates, though for different reasons:
Bachmann was nurturing her status, launched after a widely praised appearance at the last debate, as a favorite of evangelical Christians and Tea Party conservatives who are influential in Iowa's opening caucuses next winter.
She now faces a challenge for those voters from Perry. In fact, after Perry announced he would make his Iowa debut at the Black Hawk County GOP Lincoln Day Dinner on Sunday, Bachmann said she would speak there as well.
The event takes place in Waterloo, her birthplace and the site she used to announce her candidacy.
Former Minnesota governor Tim Pawlenty was trying to break through after a slow start. He has been spending most of his time and his campaign treasury in Iowa, where he has been arguing that he is a more credible nominee and general-election candidate than Bachmann.
Former Utah governor Jon Huntsman, who isn't competing in the Ames straw poll, was trying to make a good first impression in his inaugural debate appearance. He has been focused on New Hampshire, site of the first primary.
"When you look at me and you ask, 'What is that guy going to do,' I'm going to do exactly what I did as governor," he said.
Romney, leading in the USA TODAY and other national polls, has been trying to stay above the fray and focus his fire on  Obama.
Romney parried questions about whether he had ducked taking a position on the debt-ceiling debate that was dominated Washington. He refused to say whether he would have vetoed the eventual compromise. "I'm not going to eat Barack Obama's dog food," he said. "What he served up is not what I would have done if I'm president of the United States."
Also participating: Corporate executive Herman Cain, former House speaker Newt Gingrich, Texas Rep. Ron Paul and former Pennsylvania senator Rick Santorum.
The debate was sponsored by Fox News, the Iowa Republican Party and The Washington Examiner.
Rep. Steve King, R-Iowa, said before the debate began that turnout and voter excitement would play a large role in determining who wins the straw poll. Undecided voters were less likely to show up, he noted.
That could benefit Paul, who has a network of avid supporters across the state from his candidacy four years ago, King said. And Bachmann has created the most excitement -- but her popularity has made her a target among other candidates.
"She has a lot at stake," the congressman said. "She is probably the one they would like to see stumble."
During the day, Romney and Huntsman toured the Iowa State Fair. Neither are actively competing in the straw poll.
Huntsman, in his first campaign visit to the Hawkeye State, paid tribute to the fair's iconic butter cow -- yes, it's a cow carved from butter -- which is celebrating its 100th anniversary this year.
From a stage of hay bales , Romney gave his stump speech and then engaged in a heated exchange with hecklers who chanted "Wall Street greed!" and "Corporations!"
"Corporations are people, my friend," Romney finally replied, visibly frustrated. "Every (thing) that big corporations earn ultimately goes to people."
Kucinich reported from Iowa; Page from Washington, D.C. 




Cities combat climate change; 'Adaptation' is name of game in fighting adverse effects





In Chula Vista, Calif., new waterfront buildings will be required to have higher foundations because of an expected rise in sea levels.
In Chicago, where flooding is predicted to worsen, residents can get rebates for putting rain barrels, compost bins and native plants in their yards.
And in New York City, where rising tides are also projected, wastewater treatment plants will elevate their pumps.
While some members of Congress debate the scientific validity of climate change, these U.S. cities are going beyond efforts to mitigate it with lower greenhouse gas emissions. They're at the forefront of an emerging trend: adaptation.
"It's a new field," says Brian Holland, director of climate programs at ICLEI-Local Governments for Sustainability USA. His association launched a Climate Resilient Communities program last year to help cities study effects of climate change and finance ways to adapt.  Nearly 600 local governments, representing one-fourth of the U.S. population, have signed on.
As extreme weather continues to sweep the nation and Americans struggle to deal with heat waves and flooding, Holland says many are convinced they need to act. "We're already seeing consequences of climate change," he says, "and those will only intensify."
An increasing number of cities have begun vulnerability assessments, and some -- notably Chicago -- are already taking steps to counter adverse effects.
"We're mostly at the study and planning phase," says Michelle Mehta, co-author of the "Thirsty for Answers" report this month by the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC), which looks at how a dozen U.S. cities will be affected.
The NRDC report says coastal cities such as New York and San Francisco anticipate "serious challenges" from sea-level rise, while Southwestern cities such as Phoenix will face water shortages and Midwestern cities, including Chicago and St. Louis, can expect more intense storms and flooding.
Climate change skeptic David Kreutzer, a research fellow in energy economics at the conservative Heritage Foundation, says there have always been "variations in weather" so it makes sense to prepare for storms. But he says cities may waste money if their regulations are based on "hysterical" projections of sea-level rise.
Scott Huth, public works director for Coronado, Calif., a beach town of 25,000,   says the planning is  not about politics or being liberal or conservative, it's simply about taking seriously "our duty to make sure that we're informed for things that might potentially happen."
Mehta says some projects meet immediate needs but will also help cities cope with problems exacerbated by climate change. Among them are elevating homes and rebuilding levees in New Orleans, which is steadily sinking. Other projects are more tailored to climate change:
Seattle has developed a climate tool,  now being tested, that allows users to input variables such as the location and timing of a proposed project to learn how it will be affected.
San Francisco plans next year to build devices in three locations to prevent salty bay water from overflowing into the city's combined storm-water and wastewater system. Rising sea levels already cause four to seven overflows each year that harm water treatment, says David Behar of the San Francisco Public Utilities Commission. "We expect a nuisance will become a problem," he says, adding: "Sea-level rise is inexorable."
Chicago is planting trees and replacing impervious surfaces such as concrete sidewalks with permeable materials to allow rain to seep into the ground. It has more than 600 green roof projects completed or underway.  "We're making the city resilient to climate changes right away," says Karen Weigert, the city's chief sustainability officer.
Chula Vista approved a climate plan in May that calls for more shade trees and "cool" or reflective roofs. Citing a study that sea levels -- already up 6 inches since 1900 -- will rise 12 to 18 inches more in the next 40 years, it also requires  that new waterfront projects account for this projected increase.
Norfolk, Va., is doing a feasibility study on measures such as dam structures to deal with the area's 14.5-inch rise in sea level over the past 80 years -- whatever the cause. "The city is trying to be as proactive as possible without engaging in the hyperbole of climate change arguments," says John White, the city's engineer for storm-water systems.
New York City is not only planting a million trees, it also has a $1.5 billion, 20-year plan for green infrastructure to help manage storm-water runoff from increasingly powerful storms.
Financing such projects is a challenge now for local governments, but not all needed changes require extra cash, says David Bragdon, director of long-term planning and sustainability for New York City.
"It's altering the way we're doing things," he says. "It's building something to fit the likely conditions of the future."
Contributing: Elizabeth Weise 



Games that teach green lessons rack up points; Popularity spreads to smartphones and video game consoles





The fate of Earth is often at stake in popular video games, such as the sci-fi space sagas Halo and Mass Effect. But a growing movement of ecologically conscious games deals with the real destiny of our actual habitat.
In the PC strategy game Fate of the World, players try their hand at juggling sociopolitical events, energy consumption, population growth, food production and natural disasters. As the head of a fictitious world environmental organization, the goal is to improve global climate-change patterns over the next 200 years.
Sounds simple, right? But an obvious strategy to wean countries off fossil fuels, for example, can result in an outcry as the economies of some nations suffer. "The players' exploration will be revealing to them the complexities" of climate change, says Ian Roberts, creative director of the U.K. studio Red Redemption, which created the game ($9.99, fateoftheworld.net) after finishing the Flash-based Web game Climate Challenge for the BBC in 2006.
"We didn't want to make any game that didn't have something relevant to everyday life," Roberts says. "We felt that games had a great ability to inform and that most of the games we played taught you how to be really good at things that were fantastical or fictional."
Roberts and Red Redemption are not alone. While unlikely to overshadow the steady stream of mainstream video game releases, the growing green game wave is spreading from computers to home console systems and smartphones.
As the cost of development has dropped, games have gained in popularity as a method to spread environmental messages. "Many different organizations want to put out green messages, be associated with the environmental movement and develop competence and conviction in saving energy," says Clark Aldrich, author of Learning Online with Games, Simulations, and Virtual Worlds and director of the Serious Play Conference to be held next week  in Redmond, Wash.
The rise and effectiveness of environmentally conscious games will be among the serious games discussed at the conference, where Fate of the World is a finalist in the  Games for Good category.
Other topics: health care, military simulations and education.
Serious games with environmental and ecological themes are becoming a tool for non-profits and governmental groups because, "This is an issue that resonates with the next generation," Aldrich says. "Both the inclusion of emotion and engagement make the messages stickier, and it speaks the language of the students."
Where green gaming began
Modern-day green games had some predecessors.  The PC gaming classic SimCity, released in 1989, had environmental underpinnings in that "pollution and congestion were main issues," Aldrich says. "Some critics of the game believed the mechanics overemphasized public transportation."
More recently, 2009's visually arresting Flower, a downloadable game for the PlayStation 3, lets players control the wind and blow petals across landscapes -- transforming the environment.
The developers meant to deliver a green message of "harmony between urban bustle and natural serenity," says Jenova Chen of Thatgamecompany. "As a medium, you can use a video game to express many things."
A look at some new and upcoming green games:
Recycling apps. In the iPhone/iPod Touch game Face the Waste (99 cents), players sort trash into the correct recycling bin as  villain Toxic Tim tries to thwart them.
The aim: help people better understand the environmental issues around them and how to reverse the harmful effects of our society's daily habits, says developer Jake Walker.
Another recycling sortable game for iPhone and iPod Touch, Eco Mania (99 cents), also has players matching items on a conveyer belt with the proper recycling bin. In between rounds, recycling tips are offered up.
"It will help kids understand what is recycled where," Aldrich says.
Web games. A wide variety of free-to-play Flash-based games address environmental issues.
In the game Yard Sale (www.ecokids.ca/pub/eco_info/topics/waste/yard_sale/index.cfm), players must price items so that they will sell and be reused. The game, says Aldrich, "highlights a real process that kids can follow, and then allows participants to engage in some basic practicing of real skills that they will need."
The international repercussions of the fast-food industry play out in The McDonald's Game (www.mcvideogame.com).
A satire of the actual food chain, the game educates players into "what goes into a fast-food business," Aldrich says, "including clearing rain forests, killing sick cows, and marketing fast food to children."
Downloadable games. Like Flower, the upcoming game Okabu will be available on the PlayStation Network (later this fall).
London-based studio HandCircus, developers of the mobile game Rolando, were inspired by an episode of the BBC TV series Planet Earth that focused on the Okavango Delta in Botswana. The show chronicled an entire season of the delta and how "from this barren desert, this beautiful ecosystem bursts from it," says company co-founder Simon Oliver.
In the colorful, cartoony game Okabu, pollution has reached the land of the cloud whales and two are sent to Earth to help the nature-loving race called the Yorubo offset the environmentally exploitive Doza race.
Like Avatar and the Japanese animated film Princess Mononoke, the game has "an implicit rather than an explicit message," Oliver says. "One of the things we really wanted to do with the game was build a lot of love and affection for the world. By creating a world that is very endearing, (we) hope that would encourage players to want to do these actions in other situations, to heal the environment itself."
As realistic simulations or abstract exercises, video games can raise awareness, says Roberts of Red Redemption, which plans to release a Macintosh version of Fate of the World -- and an update to the PC game -- next month.
"We don't really have the ability to use our world as a sandbox," Roberts says. "We only have one of them, and we can't try out things. In a game, we have that ability." 



Perry stances hurt GOP, Huntsman says





Republican presidential candidate Jon Huntsman is pounding away at rival Rick Perry's skepticism of man-made global warming and criticism of the nation's central banker, saying those stands hurt the GOP and make the Texas governor come off as a not-so-serious national figure.
Huntsman, a former Utah governor who was President Obama's first ambassador to China, has trailed in early polls nationally and in early-voting states, leading his campaign to pledge more aggressive attacks on the top candidates.
Perry, who recently entered the race and has surged to a prominent role, has provided Huntsman with an ample opening to take shots.
Perry said in New Hampshire this past week that he didn't believe in man-made global warming, branding it an unproven scientific theory. He defended the teaching of creationism in schools because evolution "has some gaps to it."
"When we take a position that isn't willing to embrace evolution, when we take a position that basically runs counter to what 98 of 100 climate scientists have said, what the National Academy of Science has said about what is causing climate change and man's contribution to it, I think we find ourselves on the wrong side of science, and, therefore, in a losing position," Huntsman told ABC's This Week.
Huntsman said he couldn't remember a time when "we actually were willing to shun science and become a party that was antithetical to science. I'm not sure that's good for our future, and it's not a winning formula."
Huntsman also ridiculed Minnesota Rep. Michelle Bachmann's claims that she could bring gasoline prices below $2 if elected president.
"I just don't know what world that comment would come from. ... That is completely unrealistic," he said.
Huntsman spoke optimistically about his chances in 2012. He predicted he would do well in early voting in New Hampshire and South Carolina, and "then we're going to bring it home in Florida."
Campaigning in Rock Hill, S.C., Saturday, Perry didn't back down, saying he believes the Earth's temperature "has been moving up and down for millenniums now, and there are enough scientists out there that are skeptical about the reasons for it."
Perry also has taken on the Federal Reserve and its chairman, Ben Bernanke.
He said the central bank's leader would be committing a "treasonous" act if he decided to "print more money to boost the economy." Such action, Perry told a crowd in Iowa, would amount to a political maneuver aimed at helping President Obama win re-election.
"These sideshows," Huntsman said, take "us that much farther off the ball" from the focus of fixing the economy and creating jobs. 



In debate debut, Perry shows his strengths, vulnerabilities; In the field of eight, spotlight was mainly on him and Romney





Rick Perry arrived at his first presidential debate packing heat.
The Texas governor who once shot a threatening coyote while jogging came armed, rhetorically, for his debut on the national political scene. He blasted rival Mitt Romney on job creation, doubled down on his critique of Social Security as a "Ponzi scheme" and defended his record on everything from education to climate change.
Perry's performance Wednesday night in the forum at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley, Calif., demonstrated not only his considerable strength in the Republican primaries -- he has rocketed to the top of the national polls little more than three weeks after announcing his candidacy -- but also his clear vulnerabilities in a general election.
And it illustrated the changing shape of the Republican contest for the nomination to take on President Obama in 2012. The spotlight was on Perry and Romney, the man he dislodged as front-runner in national polls. Minnesota Rep. Michele Bachmann, the Tea Party favorite who was the star of the first debate, was largely eclipsed and the other contenders often had to battle to get into the conversation.
So the question ahead may be this: Can Romney or others raise enough questions about Perry's ability to attract the independent voters needed to win the White House to curtail the Texas governor's stunning rise among Republican conservatives?
Romney, noting that Perry has called Social Security "a Ponzi scheme," told him, "You can't say that to tens of millions of Americans who live on Social Security and those who have lived on it." Romney said he would "make sure that we keep the program and make it financially secure."
Perry rejoined: "You cannot keep the status quo in place and call it anything other than a Ponzi scheme. It is. That is what it is."
Perry's refusal to back down may have shown his commitment to his principles, appealing to his base, but is all but certain to create serious problems with centrist voters and others who view the nation's retirement program as sacrosanct. And while he was confident in sparring about jobs, Perry dodged questions about why his state has the highest percentage of residents who lack health insurance. He seemed less certain in discussing his skepticism toward climate change when asked to name a scientist who agreed with him.
The debate, which stretched for an hour and 50 minutes, was sponsored by NBC News and Politico. Participants included Texas Rep. Ron Paul, former Utah governor Jon Huntsman, former House speaker Newt Gingrich, former CEO Herman Cain and former Pennsylvania senator Rick Santorum as well as Perry, Romney and Bachmann.
Perry demonstrated his abilities as a natural pol: Barrel-chested and conversational, confident and folksy. He talked about "gettin' the snake's head cut off" when it comes to controlling federal spending and said that amid all the criticism on stage, "I kinda feel like the piata here at the party." At one point, he gave Gingrich a broad grin and a thumbs-up sign when he mentioned the glowing introduction he wrote to Perry's book, Fed Up!.
The debate was Perry's chance to make a first impression on many Americans.
Before he announced he was running for president last month, only about half of Republican and Republican-leaning voters even knew who he was, according to the Gallup Poll. Now three of four have heard of him, and most like what they see. Perry has the strongest intensity of support of any of GOP presidential contender, Gallup found. While the favorable ratings for him and Romney are about the same, 73% and 71%, twice as many of those surveyed say they have a strongly favorable view of Perry.
The debate begins a six-week period that will shape, and perhaps winnow, the Republican field. There are three debates in 16 days -- in Simi Valley, Tampa and then Orlando -- followed next month by similar forums in Iowa and Nevada.
At that point, the opening Iowa caucuses will be just three months away. 




How conservatives should engage climate science





Texas Gov. Rick  Perry's recent  assertion that  the science of climate change has been politicized is almost certainly true. Environmental groups (the kind that always gave me F's on my congressional report cards for voting against bills such as cap-and-trade) decided a while back to run this play on the left side of the political field. But perhaps the strongest proof of  Perry's assertion  is what we conservatives are doing  now.
Aided by energized climate deniers on talk TV and radio, we're driving a powerful wedge that divides God-fearing, red-meat eating Republicans from the arugula-eating bed-wetters we see on the left. Wedges work. And yet we aspire to bring America together?
Perry asserts, and many conservatives believe, that the flow of grants have produced a corresponding flow of studies indicating human causes of  climate change. Skepticism is warranted, but it's relieved by an observation: Scientists become famous by disproving the  consensus, not by parroting it. You don't get a theory named for yourself by writing papers that say, "Yeah, like he said." You become famous (and, for the pure of heart, you advance science) by breaking through with new understandings.
Grasping at outliers
In the zeal of our disproof, many conservatives have  latched on to the outliers to create the appearance of uncertainty where  little uncertainty exists. Accordingly,  only 15% of the public knows that 97% of climate scientists have concluded that the planet is rapidly warming as a result of human activity.
Perhaps we could be forgiven for this data manipulation if we were attempting to deliver the nation from some greater ill. Many conservatives believe that, even if climate change is caused by human activity, the costs of correction outweigh the benefits. What does that calculation say about our objectivity, our commitment to accountability and our belief in free markets?
But at what cost?
Conservatives say that free enterprise, not government mandates, can deliver innovation. But we've been waiting since 1973 to be freed from foreign oil. Maybe that's because all the costs aren't "in" on petroleum -- the national security risk, the costs of protecting the supply lines out of the Middle East, the cost of the pollution from tailpipes and the cost of tax subsidies for petroleum. If those costs were paid at the pump and not out of sight,  we'd be aware of our need, and America's entrepreneurs would meet our need with new fuels.
But markets can't respond when some fuels escape accountability. If the coal industry, for instance, were held accountable for all of coal's costs -- including health effects -- we'd build emission-free nuclear power plants instead of coal-fired plants.  Electricity rates would rise because we'd be paying all of coal's cost at the meter, but health insurance premiums would fall. In such an all-costs-in scenario, the profit motive would drive innovation just as it drove innovation with the Internet and the PC -- without clumsy government mandates.
Conservatives can restore our objectivity by acknowledging that Americans are already paying all the hidden costs of energy. We can prove our commitment to accountability by properly attaching all costs to all fuels. We can prove our belief in free markets by eliminating all subsidies and letting the free enterprise system sort out winners and losers among competing fuels.
Or, more cynically, we can attempt to disprove science, protect the fossilized and deprive America of a muscular, free enterprise, no-growth-of-government alternative to cap and trade.
Bob Inglis, a Republican from South Carolina, served in the U.S. House from  1993-99 and again from 2005-11. 




Christie still quiet about presidential bid; N.J. governor's views on climate change, immigration could present some hurdles





New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie remained mum about his future plans over the weekend, leaving pundits and fellow politicians to fill the void with speculation about whether he will launch a presidential bid and shake up the Republican field.
After months of insisting he would sit out 2012, Christie is said to be seriously considering a run for president and could make a decision as early as this week. "He's thinking long and hard about it," said an adviser, who spoke under condition of anonymity due to the sensitive nature of the decision.
"He has received encouragement from people from all walks of life," the adviser told USA TODAY on Friday, adding that no one knew which way he would decide at this point.
That didn't stop fellow Republicans from commenting Sunday about what he may do. Virginia Gov. Bob McDonnell, chairman of the Republican Governors Association, said he would be surprised if Christie gets into the presidential race.
"I just think whoever's going to get in needs to do it immediately.  But Chris is a unique, successful governor with a positive outlook, and I think would fare very well against the president, but ultimately the call is his," McDonnell said  on NBC's Meet the Press.
Christie has only a few more weeks to make his decision, because state primary deadlines start in mid-October.
If he does choose to get into the race, his views on issues such as climate change and immigration could present a challenge for him in the Republican primary.
During his tenure as state attorney general, Christie once said, "Being in this country without proper documentation is not a crime."
As governor, he has said he believes climate change is real and is caused by human activity.
Republican contender Herman Cain said Christie's past comments about both issues could be tough to justify to a conservative primary electorate.
"I think that is absolutely a liability for him if he gets in the race," Cain said on Fox News Sunday. "Most of the conservatives believe that we should enforce our borders. They do not believe people should be here  (without) documentation. They do not believe global warming is a crisis or a threat." 



Christie's decision leaves GOP casting about for Mr. Right




Political shooting stars, particularly those who appear relatively late in presidential races, have a way of flaming out.
In 2004, retired general Wesley Clark's great-on-paper bid for the Democratic nomination quickly crashed to earth. In 2008, the comet was Republican Fred Thompson, whose first day in the campaign turned out to be his apogee. This year, Texas Gov. Rick Perry jumped into the race in August, shot to the top of Republican polls, only to fall back amid shaky debate performances and controversies involving his positions on Social Security, immigration and vaccination.
New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie no doubt had some of this history in mind when he announced his "now is not my time" decision Tuesday to stay out of the race for the 2012 GOP nomination despite pressure from savior-seekers to jump in. Had Christie opted for the spotlight, the vetting process would have quickly turned attention to his temper, his weight and his relatively liberal positions on gun control and climate change. And, like other late entrants, he would have found it hard to come up to speed on the complex issues of the presidency, raise money and organize for a rapidly accelerating schedule of primaries and caucuses.
That Republican activists were looking to Christie, who has held office for less than two years -- and before him Perry, who hadn't even given much thought to running until midyear -- underscores the remarkable tumult within the GOP.
The party typically has vetted its candidates fully, often putting electability and experience first. Since Barry Goldwater was shellacked in 1964, every Republican candidate has been an incumbent president, someone with  experience running for national office, or a two-term governor of a large state.
This year's casting around for a candidate -- Donald Trump? Michele Bachmann? Herman Cain? -- is a remarkable switch that underscores the extraordinary transformation the party has undergone.
It is now heavily populated with voters who think any compromise or attempt to build a consensus is wrong. This was seen last summer when Republicans torpedoed a $4 trillion deficit reduction deal because it included tax increases. It is visible now in the discontent over the candidates' perceived flaws.
Perry has been sliding in the polls at least in part because of his support of in-state tuition for illegal immigrants and state-ordered vaccinations for the HPV virus.  Whether one agrees or disagrees with his positions, it's disturbing to see such rigid litmus tests imposed. Presidents need flexibility and pragmatism to succeed, and candidates need to capture the center to win  office.
Even worse off is  Mitt Romney. In prior eras, he would be the clear front-runner as a candidate who has run for the office before, one with a record of success in business, sports and politics. And yet, a good bit of the party won't give him much consideration, at least for now. Romney's problems are that he is the establishment candidate, that he was for abortion rights before he was against it, and that the health care reform he championed as Massachusetts governor bears a striking resemblance to "ObamaCare", which many conservatives regard as an abomination. Fair enough. His contortions have left people uncertain about his convictions.
But there's no such thing as the perfect candidate. With Christie out and the first nominating contests just three months off, the search for a savior has probably come to an end. Maybe that's for the best. 



Taste this: Climate change may redraw wine regions; Rising temps could affect where best grapes grown





To the litany of changes being wrought by global warming, we may be able to add one more: where wine grapes can and can't be grown.
Within 30 years, the areas where California can grow fine-wine grapes could shrink  because of climate change, while little-known growing regions such as Seattle's Puget Sound and Oregon's Willamette Valley see growth, according to one controversial study.
A federal agency report in 2009 found that average U.S. temperatures could increase 2 to 4 degrees  by 2020 compared with the 1970s' average. That's not huge, but the best grapes "grow in a narrow geographic range that exhibits a narrow climate envelope," says Noah Diffenbaugh, a climate scientist at Stanford University.
Warming overall has meant that areas not generally associated with wine are becoming bigger players in the industry. Among them:
Southern England, Tasmania in Australia, New Zealand's South Island and Canada's Okanagan Valley in British Columbia,  says Gregory Jones, a research climatologist and wine-grape expert at Southern Oregon University in Ashland.
Puget Sound, near Seattle, where wine-grape growing only became possible beginning in the 1970s, he says.
The Finger Lakes wine country in Upstate New York, where the wine industry has taken off since the 1970s,  says David Wolfe, a specialist in agricultural climate change at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y.
In California, a paper suggesting that 50% of the state's premium wine-grape-growing areas could become too hot to grow high-quality grapes by 2039  stirred debate among grape growers. It was published this summer in the journal Environmental Research Letters.
"Climate change can and will affect all fine wine-growing regions worldwide, but the results will not necessarily be a blanket effect," the Napa Valley Vintners said in a statement.
Other scientists are more concerned with wide swings in temperatures and timing of seasons.
"We're in a much more variable climatic structure right now," Southern Oregon's Jones says.
"The pace of change projected for this century is far beyond what previous generations of farmers have had to face," Cornell's Wolfe says. 



Et cetera





David Lam, Los Angeles Times: "In spite of the daunting challenges facing the world, including global warming, rising food prices and a billion people in poverty, the 7-billionth child will almost surely have a better life than the 3-billionth or 6-billionth child.  We survived the population bomb through hard work and creativity, and we will need more of it to continue to feed the world and reduce poverty. But the remarkable experience of the last 50 years teaches us that we should not be afraid to celebrate the birth of the 7-billionth child."
St. Petersburg Times, editorial: "During the Republican presidential debates,  Herman Cain seemed at ease  dishing out his simplistic 9-9-9 tax plan. The longer Cain stands under the front-runner spotlight, the less prepared he looks. Cain couldn't seem to settle on a policy toward abortion   and when he finally did, it was the extreme position of no abortions under any circumstances. He also seems ill-prepared to respond to allegations that he sexually harassed women when he was an executive with a restaurant industry trade group. This kind of scrutiny comes with running for high office. But Cain is a political amateur, and the more he talks, the more it shows." 



Emission tax could inflate airfares; Airlines aren't happy with plan that aims for more fuel-efficient jets





A European program to charge airlines for their greenhouse-gas emissions could raise round-trip ticket prices from the United States by more than $30 starting next year.
Environmental groups and some travelers praise the European Union's Emission Trading Scheme as a way to curb climate change. The goal is to spur airlines and manufacturers to build more efficient planes like Boeing's 787 Dreamliner.
"Hopefully, this will help them do that a lot faster," says Thomas Buchen, 65, who has flown 4 million miles by traveling as far as Dubai from his home in Williamsburg, Va., to build golf courses. "We're trying to be as environmentally friendly as we can."
But airlines are fighting the program aggressively in court and in the political arena. The meter starts running Jan. 1 on fees that U.S. airlines estimate will cost them $3.1 billion over the next decade.
The U.S. House voted Oct. 24 to prohibit airlines from participating in the program.
And a vote is expected Wednesday  in Montreal by an international group that sets policy for aviation safety and environmental standards. The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) is expected to oppose the European scheme, amid growing outrage in China, Russia and India.
"If imposed on Jan. 1, this tax could close down direct travel from most central and western U.S. airports to Europe, and remaining airline ticket costs would skyrocket," says Rep. John Mica, R-Fla., head of the House transportation committee. "This ill-conceived EU aviation tax scheme is a violation of international law."
The debate will play out over the next few months. A European court will decide whether the program should proceed. If successful, Europe could forge ahead despite international opposition. Or an international political compromise could be negotiated.
What's at stake
The European program caps carbon-dioxide emissions at 2006 levels and allows airlines to fly 85% of that amount for free in the first year. The free amount would drop to 82% after that.
But airlines must pay for the rest -- and any increase in fuel burning -- by buying what are called allowances from other industries burning less. That's where the costs and the grumbling come in.
At a Sept. 30 meeting, representatives of 20 other countries including India, Russia and China issued a joint statement opposing the European law and calling it inconsistent with international law.
Luo Chaogeng, co-chairman of China Airlines, calls the scheme "a violation of human values" and promises "unremitting efforts" to oppose the program.
Separately, even Italy has complained that short- and midrange routes are penalized in comparison with long-range flights and warned of possible retaliation from China and the United States.
"Finally, we believe these are real, urgent problems that call for urgent assessment before the system comes into force," the Italian delegation to the Council of the European Union wrote Sept. 29.
Meanwhile, the Air Transport Association, an industry group representing U.S. airlines, filed a lawsuit with United, Continental and American against the program in the United Kingdom's High Court.
In the rough equivalent of an appeal, the case is pending in the European Court of Justice.
But the court's advocate general, Juliane Kokott, prepared a non-binding opinion for the court Oct. 6 that framed the issues in the case and disappointed U.S. airlines.
She calls the emission scheme adopted in 2003 "a cornerstone of European policy on climate change" and says it is compatible with international law.
Now all sides are waiting to hear what the court's 13 judges think of the program.
The cost
Nailing down the cost to passengers isn't easy.
But Connie Hedegaard, the European Union's commissioner for climate action, says the cost could range from 2 euros to 12 euros for each one-way trip across the Atlantic. At 1.42 euros to the dollar, that means $2.84 to $17 per ticket.
As an example, she said a trip from Paris to Beijing would have 627 kilograms of carbon-dioxide emissions for each passenger. The cost at current carbon prices would be about $10.68.
But Hedegaard says because most of the carbon allowances are free, airlines that pass along the entire fee to passengers could use part of that money to reduce emissions.
"This additional revenue could be used, for instance, to modernize the fleet, improve fuel efficiency and use non-fossil aviation fuels," Hedegaard said.
The prospect of higher prices hasn't registered much in the U.S.
"This is what I'd consider to be an inside-baseball thing," says Rick Seaney, chief executive of the consumer group FareCompare.com. "Then they'll be upset about it and they'll blame the airlines."
Skeptics of global warming remain among frequent fliers.
"I think it's unfair," says Thomas Lane of Portland, Ore., who flies about 80,000 miles a year wholesaling bridal attire. "I think we're just in a cyclical warming trend."
Even supporters are watching how the money is spent.
Valerie Peck of Oakland says she already pays about $40 a month to offset her routine carbon usage and would be happy to pay for her airline usage -- so long as the money goes for the environment.
"There's got to be proof that they're getting it or else it's like everything else in politics and it goes into the general budget," says Peck, who flies more than 100,000 miles a year as a consultant.
Where does the money go?
U.S. airlines note that Europeans aren't promising to spend all the money on climate change.
The European Union's directive on the program says the money "should be used to tackle climate change" to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions, fund research and adapt to climate changes.
But each country will decide how to spend its share. The directive says, "Decisions on national public expenditure are a matter for member states."
"Considering the state of the European economy and the debt problems that many European countries face, at this point we've got to believe this money is going to go to the general fund to try to bail out some of these European economies," says Steve Lott, a spokesman for the Air Transport Association.
Airline efforts
U.S. airlines say they already try to burn less fuel through lighter planes, better engines and strategies such as using a single engine to taxi.
One innovation, the upturned ends of wings called "winglets," saves up to 4% of fuel over long trips.
Nancy Young, vice president of environmental affairs for the Air Transport Association, says aviation fuel efficiency improved 110% from 1978 to 2009. That resulted in a savings of 2.9 billion metric tons of carbon dioxide.
But airlines argue it's unfair for Europe to penalize them for burning fuel outside of the continent.
A flight from San Francisco to London is in European airspace less than 9% of the time, yet must pay for burning fuel for the whole trip.
In contrast to the European program, U.S. airlines prefer an ICAO goal to cap emissions in 2020.
"We're not saying no," Young says. "We're saying no to implementation of a unilateral scheme using European targets where the money gets funneled to European coffers."
But environmental groups contend that airlines and the ICAO have dragged their feet for years. Environmentalists are cheering the Europeans for forcing the hands of airlines.
"The airlines have done back flips to dodge pollution control in the International Civil Aviation Organization, where countries have spent 15 years failing to agree on a program to cut carbon pollution," says Annie Petsonk, international counsel at Environmental Defense Fund.
Rep. Henry Waxman, D-Calif., says Boeing and Pratt & Whitney could benefit from airlines buying newer planes.
"The program will encourage airlines to purchase new aircraft with lower fuel costs, boosting the economy and potentially saving consumers money," Waxman says.
The politics
The sky isn't falling yet. While the meter starts running on carbon burning Jan. 1, the Europeans aren't scheduled to start collecting the money until 2013.
In the meantime, the European Court of Justice is expected to rule late this year or early 2012.
But even if the European Court of Justice rules against the U.S. airlines, the case would head back to the English court for more wrangling.
U.S. lawmakers and diplomats are angling for a political resolution.
Krishna Urs, the State Department's deputy assistant secretary for transportation, says the administration wants to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions but strongly opposes the European scheme.
"We maintain our strong legal and policy objections to the inclusion of flights by non-EU carriers in the (program) and do not see the European Court of Justice process as resolving these objections," Urs says.
But Young of the ATA says the path is illuminated by an earlier dispute at the International Civil Aviation Organization between the United States and Europe about airplane noise that led to a negotiated agreement.
"We would like to see the same thing happen here," Young said. 



Report: Climate change worsens extreme weather events





Heat waves, floods and other extreme weather worsen with global warming, suggests a major international climate report released today.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report, obtained in draft form by USA TODAY, stresses that expanding cities and populations worldwide, also raise the odds of severe impacts from weather disasters.
"Unprecedented extreme weather and climate events" look likely in coming decades as a result of a changing climate, says the draft report. A final version  will be released today by IPCC chief Rajendra Pachauri  at a meeting hosted by report sponsors, the World Meteorological Organization and United Nations Environment Programme, in Kampala, Uganda.
The IPCC and other scientific groups, such as the U.S. National Academy of Sciences, have reconfirmed over the past decade that greenhouse gas emissions from burning fossil fuels, and deforestation, have led to a 1.4-degree rise in average global-surface-temperatures worldwide in the past century. That rise, the IPCC says, is likely to increase,  with at least 2-in-3 odds that climate extremes have already worsened because of man-made greenhouse gases.
"The time is now for this report," says University of Illinois climate scientist Don Wuebbles, pointing to recent studies linking climate change to extreme weather.  The IPCC report's projection  for the next century:
Worse heat waves worldwide are "very likely."
"Medium confidence" exists that droughts will worsen across southern North America, the Mediterranean and elsewhere.
"High confidence" exists that  economic losses from weather disasters are increasing, with huge year-to-year swings.
The report is noteworthy for pointing to over-development as the driver for increasing dollar losses from extreme weather events, not climate change, says the University of Colorado's Roger Pielke Jr., a past critic of IPCC reports.
"It's dangerous to blame every extreme weather event on climate change," says Weather Underground meteorologist Jeff Masters, adding that it's often hard to make the case for a connection between one and the other. Even so, Masters says, that climate change is increasing  the chances of  floods, droughts and heat waves.
This year, there have been 14 billion-dollar U.S. weather  disasters, according to global reinsurance firm Aon Benfield, shattering the previous record of nine set in 2008. 




Report ties weather to climate change; Extreme events more likely in decades ahead





Heat waves, floods and other extreme weather worsen with global warming, suggests a major international climate report released today.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report, obtained in draft form by USA TODAY, stresses that expanding cities and populations worldwide, also raise the odds of severe impacts from weather disasters.
"Unprecedented extreme weather and climate events" look likely in coming decades as a result of a changing climate, says the draft report.
A final version  will be released today by IPCC chief Rajendra Pachauri  at a meeting hosted by report sponsors, the World Meteorological Organization and United Nations Environment Programme, in Kampala, Uganda.
The IPCC and other scientific groups, such as the U.S. National Academy of Sciences, have reconfirmed over the past decade that greenhouse gas emissions from burning fossil fuels, and deforestation, have led to a 1.4-degree rise in average global-surface-temperatures worldwide in the past century.
That rise, the IPCC says, is likely to increase,  with at least 2-in-3 odds that climate extremes have already worsened because of man-made greenhouse gases.
"The time is now for this report," says University of Illinois climate scientist Don Wuebbles, pointing to recent studies linking climate change to extreme weather.  The IPCC report's projection  for the next century:
Worse heat waves worldwide are "very likely."
"Medium confidence" exists that droughts will worsen across southern North America, the Mediterranean and elsewhere.
"High confidence" exists that  economic losses from weather disasters are increasing, with huge year-to-year swings.
The report is noteworthy for pointing to over-development as the driver for increasing dollar losses from extreme weather events, not climate change, says the University of Colorado's Roger Pielke Jr., a past critic of IPCC reports.
"It's dangerous to blame every extreme weather event on climate change," says Weather Underground meteorologist Jeff Masters, adding that it's often hard to make the case for a connection between one and the other.
Even so, Masters says, that climate change is increasing  the chances of  floods, droughts and heat waves.
This year, there have been 14 billion-dollar U.S. weather  disasters, according to global reinsurance firm Aon Benfield, shattering the previous record of nine set in 2008.
Tornadoes, hurricanes and floods in these 14 disasters killed more than 600 people., reports Weather Underground meteorologist Jeff Masters. 



Durban climate summit key to redoing Kyoto Protocol; 'Time is running out' for '97 deal





As prospects for a major global accord on climate change look dim,  ensuring that  negotiations continue  may be the most a United Nations climate summit will achieve next week.
Beginning Monday in Durban, South Africa, the 12-day U.N. Framework Convention on Climate Change picks up where  last year's meeting in Cancun left off.
What eluded negotiators then, and still does today, is a grand bargain in which 194 nations commit to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions that most scientists contend are contributing to a warmer climate.
"Almost everyone agrees that some kind of big deal is unlikely," says international negotiations expert David Victor of the University of California-San Diego. Economically, he says, "these are dark times and we have made that choice already in past meetings."
Nations with struggling economies remain fearful that restrictions on emissions will curtail economic activity.
Over the past two years, world leaders have failed to agree on  a successor to the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, which  obligated  industrial nations, but not the United States, to lower greenhouse gas emissions. The goal was to help keep global surface temperature warming to less than a 3.6-degree-Fahrenheit average increase over pre-industrial levels.
In the past century, temperatures have risen 1.4 degrees, according to the U.S. National Academy of Sciences. Now a deadline approaches: The Kyoto Protocol expires next year.
"It is clear that Durban is the end of the line for some of these pressing climate change issues and we cannot delay it any longer," South Africa's Maite Nkoana-Mashabane, presiding official over the meeting, said last month. In particular, Nkoana-Mashabane and others have called for the meeting to settle:
Whether wealthy nations really will pony up the $100billion a year they pledged at Cancun to help poor ones buy cleaner power facilities and adjust to climate effects.
Verification standards for emissions cuts.
Management of clean energy project "credits" for forest conservation, in which poor countries are paid to preserve rainforests from development  after 2012.
"Any number of outcomes are possible," says Jennifer Morgan of the World Resources Institute in Washington, D.C., an environmental think tank. "Definitely in (the) discussion is a new look for the Kyoto Protocol, because time is running out."
Prospects for such a replacement have dimmed.  Japan, saddled with a decade-long weak economy and recent earthquake losses,  has shown  little appetite for signing on to a sequel to the protocol.
U.S. and Chinese negotiators, meanwhile, have sparred for years over whether developing nations, which were not required to make cuts under the protocol, should pledge to do more to curb their emissions.
As occurred on the eve of a 2009 meeting in Copenhagen, a cache of e-mails from climate scientists at the United Kingdom's University of East Anglia were hacked and released before the Durban meeting this week. They revealed researchers bickering with one another and taking shots at climate science critics, who had alleged that the earlier e-mails showed scientists were manipulating data to support the case for global warming.
Investigations last year into the earlier e-mail release cleared scientists of improper actions, but criticized them for not engaging with their critics.
Sen. James Inhofe, R-Okla., said in a statement that the latest e-mails are "just one more reason to halt the (President) Obama EPA's job killing global warming agenda."
Environmental public opinion expert Riley Dunlap of Oklahoma State University   says, "The timing of the (e-mail) release really does show the tactics that opponents of regulation at all costs pursue."
Morgan says results from Durban are important even if the  outcome is limited to an agreement on carbon credit or emission cut verification rules, rather than  a grand bargain on emissions cuts that many observers are still hoping for between China and the U.S., the largest emitters of fossil fuel-produced greenhouse gases.
The Kyoto Protocol's expiration next year "may actually be helpful," Victor says.  If there's failure to achieve a broad agreement, he suggests the world's nations will each turn to more cost-effective adjustments  to address a warming climate. 



Gingrich endures shifts in policy; Candidate sees no backlash from base





Former House speaker Newt Gingrich has criticized former Massachusetts governor Mitt Romney for inconsistent comments on conservative issues, although Gingrich's record shows that he, too, has been inconsistent on many of the same issues.
As Gingrich has risen in the polls from an also-ran to a top contender, his contradictory positions on several issues have come under increased scrutiny. Those include his support for the individual health care mandate that he now describes as "unconstitutional;" his long relationship with housing lender Freddie Mac during a time when he was critical of politicians for propping up the government-sponsored enterprises and his view on the impact of climate change.
Unlike Romney, however, Gingrich has not seen a backlash with the base. Instead his stock among conservatives has recently experienced a resurgence. Several former aides say that's because of his long record in conservative circles and others to the passing fancy of the right wing of the Republican Party.
"I don't know that it will last forever," former Gingrich aide and Republican strategist Rich Galen said of the current conservative honeymoon. "He's probably steeled himself to the (old attacks) but challenges to his positions are something he may not be as ready for, because he may see them as challenges to his intellectual honesty."
One Republican contender, Rep. Ron Paul of Texas, has released an opening salvo against him with an ad questioning Gingrich's "serial hypocrisy" and quoting newspaper articles, pundits and  conservative talk radio host Rush Limbaugh to illustrate Gingrich's numerous policy changes.
"No candidate in the race has achieved more conservative reform of government or spent more time and energy championing the cause of the conservative movement than Newt Gingrich, which is why voters across the country are choosing Newt over Mitt Romney," Gingrich spokesman R.C. Hammond said in a statement responding to Paul's ad.
The Paul ad begins with a commercial Gingrich shot with Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., in 2008 promoting bipartisan solutions to climate change.
In his 2007 book, A Contract with the Earth, Gingrich and his co-writer Terry  Maple wrote that they "recognize climate change is supported by a wealth of scientific data derived from a diversity of measurement techniques" and said they "cannot be certain about the variance introduced by distinctly human activities."
In a recent interview with Fox News, Gingrich called his 2008 ad a "stupid" misstep and reiterated his belief that "the evidence is not complete" on the subject.
During the last few debates, Gingrich has bristled at moderators and fellow candidates who have questioned his policy shifts on everything from foreign policy to health care to his relationship with Freddie Mac, the federally backed housing lender.
Gingrich bristled at a question about his perceived flip-flop on Libya during an Aug. 11 debate in Iowa. He had first supported a no-fly zone and later said he would not intervene.
At the debate, Gingrich  called it a "gotcha question," saying  he was taken out of context and changed his answer after President Obama changed his policy. Gingrich said the situation in Libya had changed between the two comments, so it was not a flip-flop.
During a CNN debate in October,  Romney told Gingrich the idea for his state's requirement that residents buy health insurance came from Gingrich. Gingrich, who supported such a mandate, said the idea  came from the conservative Heritage Foundation.
In a recent interview with CNN, Gingrich said he could have handled the exchange better. "If I would have been clever, I would turn and say, 'I've admitted I was wrong. I've learned, and I've changed my mind. Why haven't you?'" he  said.
Such flexibility makes Gingrich a better candidate, says Tony Blankley, a GOP strategist, former Gingrich aide and current supporter.
"I think there is a sense that people understood that Newt was going for what he thought was right," Blankley said. "Romney has given the impression, maybe falsely, that he's going for what he thinks is useful for him."
His relationship with Freddie Mac before the collapse of the mortgage industry in 2008 has been a tougher issue for Gingrich to explain.
Gingrich has acknowledged reports that he received $1.6million in consulting fees from Freddie Mac between 1999 and 2008. In an April 24, 2007, interview posted on Freddie Mac's website, he said  Freddie Mac and other government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) made it easier for people to buy homes.
His explanations for his work for Freddie Mac have shifted. He said at a  debate  in November that he gave Freddie Mac executives advice as a historian, told them their business model was "insane" and that the housing market was a giant bubble.
Former  representative Bob Walker, a Gingrich adviser, said the idea that Gingrich was "out shilling" for Freddie Mac was false.
"They were looking into how to get more conservative support, they chose not to (take his advice)," he said. "That happens a lot in corporate America." 



Heat is on as climate talks wrap up without new treaty





Leading scientists warned this week that climate change is accelerating, but this year's U.N. climate negotiations are poised to end without a new binding accord to reduce the world's greenhouse gas emissions.
The 12-day U.N. Framework Convention on Climate Change in Durban, South Africa, is likely  to end today  or Saturday much as it began -- without a definitive successor to a 1997 global warming treaty, the first phase of which expires next year.
The Kyoto Protocol obligates 37 industrial nations to lower their greenhouse gas emissions, compared with 1990 levels, an average of about 5% between 2008 and 2012. It does not require cuts of developing countries, including China and India. The United States never ratified the treaty because of its exemptions for the developing world but has made voluntary efforts to cut emissions.
Now, the European Union says it will not renew its pledges to reduce emissions for another five-year period unless all countries -- rich and poor alike -- agree to negotiate a new binding treaty. That means it would include the world's two largest sources of the carbon dioxide emissions that contribute to global warming: the U.S. and China.
"The U.S. is not on board," says Alden Meyer of the Union of Concerned Scientists, adding India and China are also playing hardball. "It's very frustrating," he says. "We can't wait another eight or 10 years to raise our game. The science is very clear that we're running out of time."
A panel of federal and academic scientists warned earlier this week, at the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco, that the world's climate will warm faster than predicted.  Also, the Global Carbon Project, an international group of scientists, reported that global carbon dioxide  emissions jumped the largest amount on record last year -- 5.9%.
The United States has received a lot of criticism at  Durban.  On Thursday, an American college student was ejected from the conference when she disrupted a speech by Todd Stern, the U.S. special envoy for climate change, by saying the U.S. was stonewalling.
"That's just a mistake. It is not true," Stern later told reporters. "We are strongly committed to promptly starting a process to move forward on that," he said, referring to the EU's proposed "road map" toward a new treaty.
Rebecca Lefton, of the Center for American Progress, a Washington-based progressive think tank, welcomed Stern's support for future negotiations, adding: "What's needed now is to extend the process."
Stern said he expects the conference's negotiators, from nearly 200 countries,  to finalize a Green Climate Fund providing poor countries $100billion a year to adapt to and mitigate climate change. He said he also expects they'll create a global center to share climate technology.
Such actions as well as individual country efforts to address climate change may prove more effective than the Kyoto approach, says Reid Detchon, of the United Nations Foundation, a charity set up by Ted Turner to support U.N. causes. He adds: "We are transitioning to a new basis for collaborative action." 








