ATTACK OF THE SUPER PACS; South Carolina is under siege. Two years after rulings eased spending limits, political groups' attack ads take aim and fire -- again and again



The commercials run non-stop: Newt Gingrich is savaged as an ethically challenged politician who teamed with up Democrat Nancy Pelosi on global warming. Mitt Romney is condemned as a greedy corporate raider who slashed American jobs in his heartless chase for profits.
Those sharp attacks aren't coming from any of the five Republican candidates battling to win South Carolina's primary, but from the newest weapon in presidential politics -- well-financed super PACs scrambling to influence the outcome of Saturday's pivotal election.
Even in a state known for its hardball politics, the onslaught of television commercials and nightly automated calls to voters' homes have been unrelenting as candidates and their allies unleash what analysts say is likely to be one of most expensive advertising barrages in state history.
"It's a tsunami," said Sandy Funderburk, general sales manager of WCSC, the CBS television affiliate in Charleston. "I've never quite seen anything like it."
The frenzy offers a stark illustration of the way multimillion-dollar campaigns by outside groups threaten to upend this year's presidential election and could change the contours of American politics for years to come. South Carolina's primary coincides with the second anniversary of a milestone Supreme Court decision that helped pave the way for these groups to raise unlimited amounts of money from corporations and unions to directly support candidates or assail their political foes. Outside groups have spent at least $26 million to influence the presidential race, Federal Election Commission records show.
The stakes Saturday couldn't be higher for Republicans.
South Carolina, the first Southern stop in the race for the White House, may be the last chance for Mitt Romney's rivals to slow his march to the Republican nomination and emerge as a conservative alternative to Romney, following his back-to-back wins in Iowa and New Hampshire.
For Romney, who finished a humbling fourth here in 2008, a decisive victory in the solidly Republican Palmetto State, would cement his standing among his party's conservatives.
In every election since the state party launched its presidential primary in 1980, South Carolina's GOP voters have picked their party's eventual nominee.
"If you are going to derail Romney, this is the place," said David Woodard, a Clemson University political scientist and GOP consultant who is unaffiliated in the presidential race. "But if he wins here, it's game, set, match. Romney."
'You just get bombarded'
It's hard for South Carolinians to escape the TV skirmishes.
In a single, 30-minute span on a recent morning this week, 13 political ads unspooled before viewers watching NBC's Today on WMBF-TV, the  affiliate serving Florence and Myrtle Beach.
In one, Texas Rep. Ron Paul denounced Gingrich and former Pennsylvania senator Rick Santorum as "serial hypocrites." Romney touted his business record in another. Texas Gov. Rick Perry argued he was "the conservative you can trust" in a third.
But nearly half of the ads were bankrolled by the candidate-specific super PACs, that have emerged as big players in politics.
Overall, seven super PACs backing the major presidential candidates have been active in South Carolina, pumping at least $6.5 million into the state, federal records show.
So far, they are outspending the candidates themselves, said Kenneth Goldstein, president of the Campaign Media Analysis Group. "Not only is everyone engaged, everyone's super PAC is engaged."
Even comedian Steven Colbert, who has satirized campaign-finance rules that allow super PACs to exist, entered the fray. A pro-Colbert super PAC is running a 60-second TV spot in Charleston, calling Romney a "serial killer" of corporations.
Some South Carolina Republicans, who attended a GOP presidential debate in Myrtle Beach on Monday night, said they couldn't wait to get to the debate,  if only to get away from the television set and all those ads.
"I think everybody in South Carolina will be very glad after Saturday," said Glenda Taylor, 65, a real estate saleswoman from Pawleys Island, S.C.  "You just get bombarded.
Taylor said some of her friends resent the daily, automated "robocalls" even more. "I know they have to do it," she said. "It's part of the campaign. I just don't pay attention."
Long-time ties, unlimited spending
Outside groups have buffeted presidential campaigns before.
Swift Boat Veterans for Truth, a political non-profit bankrolled by wealthy conservatives, contributed to the defeat of Democratic presidential nominee John Kerry in 2004 with TV commercials questioning his Vietnam record.
But candidate-aligned super PACs are new forces in politics -- unleashed by a pair of 2010 federal court rulings, including the Supreme Court's decision in Citizens United that for the first time allowed unlimited corporate and union spending to directly advocate for or against a candidate. For decades prior, campaign-finance laws barred corporations and unions from funding ads that explicitly called for the election or defeat of candidates.
Federal rules prohibit the new political action committees from coordinating with candidates, but many are run by politicians' long-time allies. Restore Our Future, a pro-Romney group, is run by Charles Spies, the CFO of Romney's 2008 campaign. It's not to be confused with Winning Our Future, a pro-Gingrich PAC, run by several of his former aides.
An individual donor can give no more than $2,500 to a presidential candidate for the general or primary election, but can write a check for millions of dollars to super PACs.
Despite their vague, patriotic-sounding names, the super PACs have emerged as the bad cops in GOP primary fights, pounding rivals with attacks as their favored candidates stay positive and argue they have little control over the groups.
At his home near Clemson, Woodard said he has received mailers from Romney's campaign, touting his conservative credentials.  The mailers from the pro-Romney Restore Our Future PAC, however, lambast Santorum for sponsoring earmarks while in Congress.
Both Gringrich and Santorum used part of the GOP debate here Monday night to deplore these super PAC ads and called on other candidates to exert their influence to stop them.
Keeping campaigns afloat
But without the super PAC spending on their behalf, analysts say, candidates such as Santorum and Gingrich would have had difficulty sustaining their campaigns through Saturday's primary. Through Dec. 31, Romney raised $56 million for his White House bid -- nearly five times the amount collected by Gingrich, according to preliminary figures released by the campaigns. Aided by a $5 million infusion  from Las Vegas casino mogul Sheldon Adelson, the pro-Gingrich Winning Our Future has pledged to spend more than $3 million in South Carolina as it attacks Romney's record at the private-equity firm Bain Capital.
An extended primary battle is good for the country, said Foster Friess, a wealthy mutual-fund manager from Wyoming, who acknowledges he had helped finance the Red, White and Blue Fund, a super PAC, spending more than $820,000 to help Santorum in South Carolina.
"I look at my contribution as a way of letting Americans see someone they might not have had an opportunity to know otherwise," Friess told them this week. "If I'm right and Rick Santorum becomes president, I'll feel like I have contributed to the health of our nation by helping people see who he is."
Friess won't say how much he has donated.
The public won't know the full list of super PAC donors and how much they have given until the committees file reports with the Federal Election Commission Jan. 31 -- 10 days after South Carolina's GOP voters have made their choice.
While candidate-aligned super PACs can keep a faltering campaign afloat, the spending has its limits. A pro-Jon Huntsman committee, Our Destiny PAC, spent $2.5 million before he dropped out of the race.  Make Us Great Again, a pro-Perry group, spent nearly $4 million in several early voting states.
But Perry's epic debate stumbles -- including the infamous "oops" moment when he forgot the name of the third government department he would eliminate as president -- sank his campaign in Iowa, where he finished fifth. Polls now show him near the bottom of the pack in South Carolina.
"You can't fix ugly," said Fergus Cullen, a former New Hampshire Republican Party chairman.
Some experts say it's also too soon to tell whether super PAC attacks are hurting candidates.
Gingrich's polls numbers in Iowa plummeted after an advertising barrage from the pro-Romney Restore Our Future, but his precipitous fall also came as Gingrich's record faced increased media scrutiny, said Bob Biersack, a senior fellow at the Center for Responsive Politics.
In South Carolina, Romney sits atop the polls as he has for most of the month, with Gingrich in second place. But a CNN/Time/ORC poll released Wednesday shows Romney's advantage over Gingrich shrinking.
'You cannot separate money and power'
Many campaign-finance watchdogs, however, say the rampant spending in South Carolina points to  a bruising general-election battle.
American Crossroads,  affiliated with GOP  strategist Karl Rove, plans to raise $240 million for its outside spending to defeat Obama and congressional Democrats this year. Priorities USA Action, a group backing President Obama and run by former White House staffers,  also was formed to raise and spend unlimited amounts to push his re-election.
"We are back to a system of legalized bribery," said Fred Wertheimer, president of Democracy 21, which supports limits on political money. "There's no question the donors putting up these huge, unlimited contributions to super PACS are buying influence over the candidates in the event they are elected."
C. Edmund Wright, a spokesman for Winning Our Future, said super PACs represent the "legal way and the best way" for a candidate's supporters to "get a message out without having to go through the media."
Will contributors have undue influence over elected officials? Wright said donors will always find a way to participate in politics. "You cannot separate money and power from each other," he said. "We are human beings."
Wertheimer  is pushing for legislation in Congress for greater disclosure of contributions.
Republicans see a push in the other direction -- to dismantle limits to give candidates and political parties equal standing with super PACs. It's a position Romney has endorsed.
Super PACS will go "for the jugular" in months ahead, said Michael Franz, a political scientist at Bowdoin College.  "If a donor gives $1 million, he wants an attack that's going to land."
The election is ugly enough for Cornelia Shoupe, 78, of  North Myrtle Beach. She would prefer to see the candidates in ads.
"Sell themselves," she  said. "Not put the other fella down." 




It feels like summer in March at the movies; Big-budget films are arriving even earlier



That summer breeze you're feeling isn't (necessarily) global warming. Hollywood is just unleashing a wave of films it used to reserve until Memorial Day or after.
Facing a calendar that executives say has become untenable in summer, studios are releasing big-budget films in the typically dreary winter months -- with solid results.
Last weekend, The Lorax, Universal's $70 million Dr. Seuss adaptation, romped to $70.7 million in its debut, nearly double what  analysts projected.
Though Hollywood has released winter cartoons for years -- last year's Gnomeo & Juliet earned $100 million after its release Feb. 11 -- analysts say studios increasingly push action and fantasy genres that usually flourish in warm months.  March features examples of both, and  five films could break $100 million, which would be a first. The record was set in 2007, when three films broke $100 million, led by 300's $211 million.
"Summer's become too crowded," says Jeff Bock of industry tracking firm Exhibitor Relations. "A movie that comes out in summer lasts maybe one month in the theaters. This gives a movie two months, a little more room to breathe."
And collect cash. Lorax probably will surpass $100 million after this weekend, facing little competition from family films. Those movies usually arrive over the summer and holidays to coincide with children on vacation.
But that could change if the studios' gamble -- that kids will pack theaters after school and on weekends -- pays off.
There will be plenty to lure them. Friday is the opening of Disney's sci-fi epic John Carter.  Next week, Jonah Hill and Channing Tatum pair off in the TV remake 21 Jump Street. The best-seller adaptation The Hunger Games opens March 23 to gargantuan expectations. And March 30 unleashes the big-budget sequel Wrath of the Titans.
"Any of these could have gone in summer," says Hollywood.com's Paul Dergarabedian. "They all have that teen feel. But the kids are proving they'll show up any time of year if the movie is right."
Nikki Rocco, Universal's president of distribution, says the studio opted for a winter release for Lorax because the calendar has become useless.
"The market is too crowded,'' she says. "You have to look at a 52-week release schedule."
Dergarabedian suggests that the crop of "summer movies not in summer" are franchise hopefuls that could have been elbowed out in summer by sequels and superheroes.
"This is very good news for the industry, because people are proving that if they've got a product they're interested in, they'll show up regardless of the calendar," he says. "Good movies were getting caught up in the summer logjam." 



Movie theaters are going a little wild for Earth Day; Animal and human heroes alike will get the spotlight



The true stars of Sunday's Earth Day 2012 won't stroll down movie-premiere red carpets or grace the covers of glossy celebrity magazines.
Instead, the assortment of wild animals, legal crusaders and politicians will use their powers of persuasion and (in some cases) inherent cuteness to call attention to an array of environmental issues via a batch of new documentaries.
This year's menagerie includes endangered polar bears (from the IMAX production To the Arctic); wild chimpanzees (Disneynature's Chimpanzee); legal consultant Erin Brokovich (drought-themed Last Call at the Oasis); and Mohamed Nasheed, embattled former president of the Republic of Maldives (The Island President, about global warming).
"This group fits in the environmental celebrity category -- it's just that in some cases the celebrity happens to be an animal," says Kathleen Rogers, president of Earth Day Network, the group that coordinates the global activities. "Regardless of who they belong to, these faces are essential to making the public focus on key issues through their stories."
The timing of the release of these documentaries is a natural: "It's the one time of year when everyone is focusing on  environment and conservation," says Don Hahn, an executive vice president at Disneynature, which has released four movies around Earth Day, starting with 2007's Earth. (The documentary, which has earned more than $108 million, is the second-highest-grossing nature film of all time, behind March of the Penguins' $127 million, according to boxofficemojo.com.)
"It's a good fit for everyone," Hahn says. "It's like releasing a holiday film around Christmas."
Meanwhile, the unleashed power of movies has a notable effect  on nature. "They are so effective in highlighting crucial issues," says Geoff York, a biologist for the World Wildlife Fund. "We are a very visual people, and these movies allow people to care on an emotional level far more than any facts and figures."
Look for emotions to start flowing in theaters across the country with the screening of these documentaries:
'Chimpanzee'
It's easy to focus on the environment when it's represented by the wide-eyed face of wild African chimp Oscar. The film (opening Friday in select cities) follows him from his early days in the Ivory Coast's Tai Forest, even capturing his first frail attempts at climbing a vine.
"Oscar wrote his own part in this by being the cutest young chimpanzee around," says co-director (with Alastair Fothergil) Mark Linfield. "He's just so gorgeous. From the first shot, the film audience just falls in love."
Oscar's tale benefits from a compelling story line that played out during the three years of filmmaking. His protective mother was killed, and, against all odds, the young chimp was adopted by the alpha male in the group, something so rare it has never been captured on film.
There isn't overt preaching about conservation in the film, narrated by Tim Allen. The filmmakers are counting on audiences to make the emotional connection with Oscar and become chimp protectors.
"You hope that people fall in love with chimpanzees and want to help save them," Linfield says. "It's conservation through the back door, which is the most effective. In terms of making people emotionally feel for chimpanzees, the movie theater is the best place to do it."
Famed anthropologist Jane Goodall, whose primate conservation institute receives a portion of Chimpanzee ticket sales during the first week of its release, sees big potential in that philosophy: "If Oscar's big brown eyes inspire people to learn more about chimpanzees and perhaps do something to help them, we can all consider the film a great success."
'To the Arctic'
The IMAX film To the Arctic (Friday) might feature the narration of Meryl Streep and the songs of Paul McCartney, but the real stars are a mother polar bear and  two 7-month-old cubs.
Director Greg MacGillivray and his producer son, Shaun, had taken five Arctic trips over four years to chronicle the effects of global warming on the region. They had an edited version of the film, but on a final trip, they came across the polar bear family and for five days shot rare footage.
"To see the mother polar bear nursing her cubs, finding seals to eat and protecting her cubs from male polar bears -- we were just pinching ourselves," Shaun says. "We knew this would resonate."
Says Greg MacGillivray: "We tore the existing movie apart and framed it around these polar bears.  It was a gift we were given."
The bears are the perfect subject to frame the discussion, because the  effect of global warming on the bears' feeding habits is obvious: The lack of ice makes hunting significantly harder.
"The polar bear is the perfect animal for us," Greg MacGillivray says. "They are the apex predator, the top of the food chain. But they can also seem like such cuddly animals."
'The Island President'
The documentary, which remains in theaters after its release March 28, also tackles  climate change through charismatic Mohamed Nasheed, who is often called the "Mandela of the Maldives." Nasheed went from a critic of his tiny country's oppressive political regime to its first democratically elected president in 2008.
Director Jon Shenk followed Nasheed extensively during his first year in office while the president took on the climate change  that was devastating his low-lying country. Its thousands of tiny tropical islands could become consumed by the rising levels of the Indian Ocean. Already, residents from 16 islands have been forced to move because of  intense erosion.
"Climate change is something that is happening now; it's not in the future,"  Nasheed says.
Nasheed proves an engaging character as he holds a Cabinet meeting underwater in scuba gear to promote his country's plight or when he turns into a tireless force at the 2009 U.N.  Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen.
"You have this sense of impending doom in the film, and on another hand, you have this hope in this hero," Shenk says.  "He fights and fights. He doesn't give up hope.
"It's David taking on Goliath all over again."
Earlier this year, Nasheed was removed from office in a political coup. But he has continued to push for environmental change.  This month, he proved such an entertaining guest on The Late Show With David Letterman that the host kept him on for two show segments, an honor generally reserved for A-list movie stars.
"Some days are bad, but I am an optimist," Nasheed says. "And I do believe goodness will finally prevail."
'Last Call at the Oasis'
Water is  also the focus of this documentary (May 4), from contamination of drinking water to severe droughts caused by climate change to the dire predictions of severe freshwater shortages.
"There's probably nothing else so important in life, and it's so in jeopardy," says director Jessica Yu.  "Yet we have no real awareness of it.
"It's not just denial. It's just not on people's radar."
Yu knew she needed strong characters to help convey the message.
"When we first started, we wanted to find people deeply engaged in these issues," she says. "So we were constantly looking for people like Erin Brockovich. And then we thought, 'Well, where is the actual Erin Brockovich?'"
The 2000 film Erin Brockovich had dramatized the legal crusader's battle over contaminated drinking water in Hinkley, Calif. Julia Roberts won an Academy Award for her portrayal, and Brockovich (now Brockovich-Ellis) has continued her environmental work.
"Everyone thought I rode off into the sunset after the movie," she says. "I've been working firsthand on these issues."
A section of Last Call follows her as she works with residents of Midland, Texas, a town with drinking water contaminated by the same chemical compound that devastated Hinkley.
"She probably has more knowledge about water pollution than anyone in the country," Yu says, adding that her colorful manner makes for compelling viewing.
"If my face can help raise awareness, I'd be honored," Brokovich says. "As the film points out, a world without water is going to be a world without us. We caused the problem, but here's the thing -- we can fix it.
"If we straighten up, we can change the collision course we are on.  Because we can see it coming." 



Why the extreme weather?; Could it be acts of nature? Or are humans and climate change the culprit? Science is not certain, but we're rolling the dice in a very serious game.



Did humans contribute to the record heat of March and the strength of April's tornadoes across much of the U.S.? Science still says, "Maybe, maybe not." But we're rolling the dice in a serious game where the "jackpot" means we lose.
There's very high scientific confidence that our fossil-fuel burning and other activities, which add carbon dioxide to the air, are turning up the planet's thermostat. In a warmer world, we expect more record highs and heat waves but fewer record lows, just as we're observing. Warmer air can carry more water vapor, so a warmer rainstorm can deliver more inches per hour. Hair dryers have a "hot" setting for good reasons, and warmer air between rainstorms can dry out the ground faster.
Thus, we expect rising CO2 to bring more floods in some places and more droughts in others, with some places getting more of both. That might seem contradictory, but it's not. And with more energy to drive hurricanes, the peak winds may increase, even if the number of storms drops.
But couldn't nature have caused the ongoing changes without our help? Imagine playing dice with a shady character. Suppose, after you lose, you discover that some of the corners are filed off and there are carefully positioned weights inside. In court, your lawyer could say, "The dice were loaded, double-sixes came up three times in a row, so the defendant owes restitution."
His lawyer, however, might counter, "My client doesn't recall where he got the dice, the modifications are really quite small, dice games are inherently variable, anomalous events do happen, so my client is innocent and should get to keep all the money plus the plaintiff's wallet."
Loaded odds
Out in the climate, the dice are being loaded to favor some unusual events. We can't prove that global warming caused any single new record, just as we can't prove that the weighted dice caused a run of double-sixes. But for many extreme weather events such as record heat, it is much harder to prove that our CO2 is innocent, just as it is very hard to prove that loaded dice didn't affect the game.
Science doesn't have a good understanding of warming's impact on the occurrence and strength of small, fierce storms such as tornadoes, so it would be very difficult to show a human fingerprint in the severity of the recent outbreaks. But extra heat and water vapor are up there, so it could be harder to show that we haven't boosted the destructive power.
More important, if we continue to burn fossil fuels and release the CO2 to the air, we're loading the dice more and more. For any "business as usual" scenario, the coming changes are projected to be much bigger than those that have occurred so far. Today's youngsters might live to see so much warming that the hottest summer now on record becomes commonplace or even cool in many places.
But here's the difference between dice and climate, between Earth and Las Vegas. Even if gamblers avoid shady dice games and play at a state lottery or a licensed casino, many do lose money, but they can quit while they still have bus fare, and there's a slight chance of striking it rich. We expect the climate changes from our CO2 to be costly, but we can limit those costs by including the best science in our planning, leaving us with much more than bus fare, and pointing to a sustainable and prosperous future.
Race against time
Unfortunately, if three rotten cherries come up on the climate slot machine before we master sustainable energy, we could lose the jackpot. Science hasn't found a plausible way for rapidly rising CO2 to turn Earth into Eden, but there is at least a slight chance of a rapidly collapsing ice sheet flooding the coasts, or widespread droughts and heat stress risking famine, or other very large problems.
Much of my research, and that of many colleagues, has been devoted to replacing these worrisome "what if's" with hard numbers. And in some cases, the worries have grown smaller as we learned more. But in other cases, the worries are still there and might even be bigger.
Even so, the best science is clear. We get many benefits from burning fossil fuels, but the CO2 is projected to change the climate in costly ways. As the easy fossil fuels are exhausted, more and more we will want sustainable alternatives.
Careful lottery players check the jackpot and their cash reserves before buying the next ticket. But though the scientific community is working to calculate the odds in the climate game, society is still rolling the increasingly loaded dice through accelerating fossil-fuel burning.
It could make you wonder who the real gamblers are.
Richard Alley, a glaciologist at Penn State University, is a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and a member of the National Academy of Sciences. He is also host of the PBS mini-series Earth: The Operators' Manual. 



Report warns of weather satellites' 'rapid decline'; Drop hinders ability to track big storms



Predicting the weather is tricky enough. Now a government-sponsored report warns that the USA's ability to track tornadoes, forecast hurricanes and study climate change is about to diminish.
The number and capability of weather satellites circling the planet "is beginning a rapid decline," and tight budgets have significantly delayed or eliminated missions to replace them, says a National Research Council analysis out Wednesday.
The number of in-orbit and planned Earth observation missions by NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration is projected to drop "precipitously" from 23 this year to only six by 2020, the report finds.
That means the number of  instruments monitoring Earth's activity is expected to decline from a peak of about 110 last year to fewer than 30 by the end of the decade.
"Right now, when society is asking us the hardest questions and the most meaningful questions, we're going to be even more challenged to answer them," said Stacey  Boland, a senior systems engineer at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California and a member of the committee that wrote the report. "We'll slowly become data-starved here."
The report credits NASA with finding creative ways to prolong the lives of existing satellites and working with international partners to fill in forecasting gaps.
However, the authors say, glue and scissors only go so far.
When a similar analysis was issued five years ago, eight satellites were expected to be in space by 2012 tracking a variety of conditions. Only three are  in orbit. Of the remaining five, two failed, one was canceled and two others won't launch until at least next year.
The pipeline looks emptier over the next decade.
Of 18 missions recommended in the 2007 report through 2020, only two are close enough to completion to register launch dates.
Dennis Hartmann, professor of atmospheric sciences at the University of Washington and chairman of the committee, warned that the loss of capacity will have "profound consequences on science and society, from weather forecasting to responding to natural hazards." 



Poll: Support slips for measures aimed at curbing global warming - Correction Appended
17 words
Byline:�Dan Vergano,
Body


From gas-mileage standards to tax breaks for windmills, public support for "green" energy measures to tackle global warming has dropped significantly in the past two years, particularly among Republicans, a new poll suggests.
Majorities still favor most such tax breaks or restrictions on industry, according to the Stanford University poll.  It shows 65% support gas-mileage standards and 73%  support tax breaks for wind and solar power. But just 43% support tax breaks for nuclear power  and 18% support hiking taxes on home electricity.
Overall, support for various steps to cut greenhouse gas emissions has dropped an average of 10 percentage points since 2010, from 72% to 62%, lead researcher Jon Krosnick says. "Most Americans (62%) still support  industry taking steps aimed at cutting greenhouse gas emissions," Krosnick says, "but they hate the idea of consumer taxes to do it." His group's nationwide polls compared responses from 1,001 people in 2010 to 1,428 people this year.
In 2010, the  National Academy of Sciences called for "strong federal policies" to curb greenhouse gas emissions from burning fossil fuels, such as oil, gasoline, coal and natural gas. It warned that "climate change is occurring" and said these fuels are partly to blame.
Public opinion experts, including Drexel University's Robert Brulle, point to declining news coverage of global warming for the falling support of steps to fight greenhouse gases; others cite the economy's doldrums.
Krosnick suggests that distrust of environmental scientists among Republican voters (41%)  may explain much of the drop. Such distrust was not seen as strongly among independent (31%) and Democratic voters (16%), he says. The average drop in support for these policies was about 7 percentage points among those who identified  as Democrats or independents vs. 14 points for Republicans.
Since Republican Sen. John McCain expressed support for steps to slow global warming during the 2008 presidential race, "we have seen a significant shift in political rhetoric in the primary races in Republican debates," Krosnick says. (McCain says he no longer supports such steps.)
Brulle says  the effect of the economy on views about climate change needs to be more carefully studied.
Even if the public supports fixes for  global warming, Brulle says, "opinion on climate change and environmental issues overall" has consistently been a low priority. Just  1% of people ranked the environment as a "top concern" in a Gallup Poll in March. 
Correction


A story Tuesday about voter views on climate change failed to clarify that Sen. John McCain, R.-Ariz., opposed climate change-related legislation in 2009 but is open to other proposals to address global warming.
Correction-Date:�May 10, 2012




New book brings some clarity to 'green' living; Sweat the 'right stuff' is advice in 'Cooler Smarter'



Food grown locally, rather than far away, supports area farmers and is often fresher, but it makes little difference in the fight against climate change.
How about e-readers vs. print books? Or opening a new car's windows rather than running its air conditioner? The answer's the same in each case: There's no big difference in which consumes less energy overall, so don't sweat it.
Those are the findings of a new eco-myth-busting guide to green living that quantifies the climate impact or carbon footprint of hundreds of consumer decisions. It tallies the energy and resources involved in making and using a product as well as the heat-trapping emissions that ensue. It challenges Americans to cut their fossil-fuel energy use 20% in the coming year.
"You can get there faster by sweating the right stuff," says climate scientist Brenda Ekwurzel, co-author of Cooler Smarter, a two-year study by The Union of Concerned Scientists, a science-based environmental group.
The book makes a plaintive call to action, arguing that climate change has reached a dire point because of human use of heat-trapping fossil fuels. "Our failure to address this problem will imperil us all," it says.
"I don't think that's true. There's not a consensus we're heading toward catastrophe," says David Kreutzer, a research fellow in energy economics and climate change at the Heritage Foundation, a self-described "conservative" think tank. He says Americans should cut their carbon footprint "if it makes them feel good," but not because they fear for the future.
In touting the most effective eco-steps, Cooler Smarter takes on four common myths:
Buy locally grown food. Many consumers may think this has climate benefits, but as it turns out, transporting food from the farm to the supermarket accounts for only about 4% of the emissions involved in food production. Most of the emissions occur at the farm itself, where it typically takes a long time and lots of grain to raise cattle.
That's why red meat has 18 times the carbon footprint as an equal amount of pasta. So a more efficacious climate approach, rather than buying meat locally, is simply buying less of it, the book says.
"But don't give up on the farmers' market," Ekwurzel says. She says fruits and vegetables have a much smaller overall carbon footprint and transportation accounts for a higher share of their emissions than it does for meat, poultry or seafood.
"What matters more than local or not local (for the environment) is the production method used," says Chris Hunt, a senior policy adviser at Sustainable Table, a non-profit that advocates for healthy, eco-friendly food. He says fewer emissions result from grass-fed beef on pasture farms compared with grain-fed beef on factory farms. Ekwurzel agrees.
Keep the old stuff.  This is not always best for the environment  when the products are energy guzzlers. Ekwurzel says many refrigerators and cars have become so much more efficient that replacing old ones will cause fewer emissions in the long run.
If a refrigerator  was made before 2003, she says, consumers will recoup -- in lower utility bills -- the cost of replacing it with an average new Energy Star unit within a few years. If you are buying a new or used car, she says, look for fuel efficiency. Compared with a car that gets 20 miles per gallon, a 40- mpg car will save 4,500 gallons of gasoline if driven 12,000 miles a year over 15 years.
Drive a hybrid.  Not all hybrids are created equal. Some use hybrid technology to boost power, not lower fuel use, and get fewer miles per gallon than  100% gasoline-fueled compacts.
You need to sacrifice comfort to cut emissions. Not so. Ekwurzel says Americans enjoy lifestyles similar to those of Germans and Japanese but use more than twice as much energy per capita. She says more efficient appliances and heating/cooling equipment can help close the gap. For example, she says, new-car air conditioners are more efficient than older versions, so consumers won't save gas by choosing instead to roll down the windows, which creates air resistance that lowers fuel mileage. 



Polarization cripples Congress?; Bipartisanship exists in the Senate, but that could change as more House members are elected to the Senate.



You would have a difficult time finding two more ideologically different senators than California Democrat Barbara Boxer and Oklahoma Republican James Inhofe. Boxer would probably not reject the title "tree-hugger," and Inhofe is the Senate's most vocal denier of the connection between greenhouse gases and global warming, calling it "the greatest hoax ever perpetrated on the American people."
Yet back in March, the two collaborated on a transportation bill that emerged from the committee Boxer chairs and on which Inhofe serves as the most senior Republican. More than that, Boxer proclaimed Inhofe a "hero" for his efforts.
On the other side of the Capitol, it was a different story. The House panel charged with writing its own version of the highway bill was bogged down in disputes so grave that Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, who does not like to interfere with the committees, was forced to step in. Lawmakers are now in discussion shrouded in secrecy and working against a June 30 deadline to reconcile the differences between the House and Senate versions. Sens. Boxer and Inhofe are united in support of their chamber's bill; disarray among House Republicans seems to be the main obstacle to agreement.
So while it would be foolish to deny that Democrat vs. Republican polarization has burdened the work of Congress, some fights on the Hill are not between Democrats and Republicans but family squabbles among House Republicans.
And it's not just on transportation that bipartisanship varies by chamber. The Senate voted 90-8 recently to consider the diabolically complicated farm bill.
Evidence of collegiality
And over on the governmental affairs committee, Chairman Joseph Lieberman, I-Conn., and his GOP counterpart, Susan Collins of Maine, were working in their usual harmonious way to produce a postal reform bill.
To be sure, these three bills pale in importance before the monumental fiscal problems that will descend on us later this year with the expiration of the Bush tax cuts and the draconian sequestration of federal spending. But they demonstrate  that Congress, and especially the Senate, retains enough vitality to function even under the most inauspicious circumstances.
The division among Republicans on the transportation bill has many sources. Some think that the price tag  is just too high. Disagreements arose between suburban Republicans who want more aid for mass transit and rural Republicans who represent few commuters. Another intraparty split is between those who favor a temporary extension of current legislation rather than a multiyear agreement. There have even been hints that some GOP leaders simply want to let the legislation lapse and deny President Obama the political boost that would come with signing what looks to them like a "jobs" bill.
Different agenda
Another problem is  that the Senate measure is a straight roads and bridges bill, while the House version contains a variety of controversial items, including approval for the Keystone XL Pipeline that would carry oil from Canada's  tar sands  to refineries in Oklahoma. Inclusion of the pipeline is a priority for Boehner and a deal-breaker for the bipartisan coalition in the Senate that passed its version of the bill by a 74-22 vote.
If included, the pipeline provision would doom the entire bill to an Obama veto.
The rapid passage of the transportation bill through the Senate and the traffic jam it has encountered in the House  occurred not because members of the House are less responsible than senators, or because senators are more high-minded than their House colleagues. Bipartisanship in the Senate is not so much a virtue as it is a necessity. Any Senate bill with a prayer of being adopted must have both a Democrat and a Republican as sponsors.
In the House, on the other hand, the GOP leadership has an incentive to send over a bill slanted as far to the right as possible so as to preserve its conservative core from the bipartisan tempering of the Senate. The effect of this is that few Democrats will support it.
Used judiciously, the much-reviled Senate filibuster that requires  any contested measure  to command 60 votes does have the effect of promoting consensus. Achieving consensus among senators who represent a  divided nation is excruciatingly difficult, especially on passionately contested issues surrounding government spending, regulation and taxes.
Even when confronting apocalyptic deadlines such as the debt extension last August, agreement is elusive. So when consensus is reached, even if it is on the margins, it's worth giving at least one cheer because it tells us that a very important American institution is not entirely enfeebled. But with almost half the Senate consisting of former House members accustomed to its fierce partisanship, and more likely on the way, prospects for long-term Senate bipartisanship are uncertain.
Though these modest achievements may be scoffed at by those who make headlines by deriding Congress, the fact that the Senate can, on occasion, still fulfill the design drafted for it by the Framers of the Constitution should, at the very least, make us a bit less cynical.
Ross K. Baker is a political science professor at Rutgers University and a member of the Board of Contributors. 



Et cetera


Dominique Browning, Time: "What kind of record smashing will it take for people to understand that we have entered a period of accelerated global warming?   We are well into the presidential campaign season, and neither Mitt Romney nor Barack Obama has seriously addressed this urgent issue. In fact, Romney has been downright cynical, and Obama has been negligent. We, the people, are letting them off the hook. It is time for voters to demand a plan of action.  What we are seeing is only the beginning of climate chaos to come."
David Horsey, Los Angeles Times: "News about the 'God particle' is one of those challenging bits of information that can make everything else feel terrifyingly insignificant. It is a reminder that each of us is merely a tiny, carbon-based organism existing for a brief moment on a small planet that, by the scale of the universe, is no more singular than a grain of sand on a beach. We are dust in the wind, utterly inconsequential in the dark expanse of time and space. At least that's one way to look at it. Another way to see it is that  only we are aware of the awesome complexity. What we do in our brief lives on this small planet may be the only thing that matters." 



Et cetera; Smart insights on the news of the day


Elizabeth Kolbert, The New Yorker: "Along with the heat and the drought and the super derecho, the country this summer is also enduring a presidential campaign. So far, the words 'climate change' have barely been uttered. This is not an oversight. Both President Obama and Mitt Romney have chosen to remain silent on the issue.   There's no discussion of what could be done to avert the worst effects of climate change, even as the insanity of doing nothing becomes increasingly obvious."
Yanzhong Huang, Asia Unbound: "China is increasingly suffering the consequences of a draconian (one child) policy that was put in place in the early 1980s.  While the economic reforms expanded the freedom of production in China, the implementation of a stringent birth-control policy severely limited the freedom of reproduction that the Chinese people had enjoyed for many centuries. (It)  has tarnished China's international image and become a constant source of friction in China's relations with the Western world. Worse, the policy is undermining China's international competitiveness." 



Natural cycles trigger extremes



The argument that global warming is causing more extreme weather is problematic because it presumes the globe is warming.
In fact, the global temperature trend line has been stable for more than a dozen years, while carbon dioxide has increased 7%. If CO2 was the driver, then why have global temperatures stopped increasing?
Keep in mind that CO2 represents 0.0395% of the Earth's atmosphere. Arguing that CO2 is driving the small temperature variations in our climate as opposed to the oceans, which cover 70% of the planet and have 1,000 times the heat capacity of air, or the output of our sun, is scientifically disturbing.
Weather is more publicized nowadays because of its impact on society and the constant push of the global warming agenda. Increases in population result in more people being in the path of Mother Nature's fury.
Global warming activists attribute every major weather event to man because they are either uninformed about history, or choose to ignore it. The latest claims resulting from this series of hot and dry summers ignores the fact that more state heat records were set in the 1930s than all other decades of the last century combined. Anyone remember the Dust Bowl?
Seven major hurricanes hit the East Coast from 1954 to 1960. Now that we are in a pattern similar to the 1950s, the East Coast is vulnerable once again, and attributing events like Hurricane Irene to global warming is incorrect.
All the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change projections for our climate have proved to be wrong. Global temperatures have stopped increasing and are nowhere near estimates made a decade ago. The IPCC incorrectly predicted  Arctic sea ice would disappear by now.
After Katrina in 2005, more and stronger hurricanes were forecast to be the future. The Accumulated Cyclone Energy Index  for the globe has instead declined to the lowest level in 30 years.
This does not mean we will not see warm weather and land-falling hurricanes. We are in a pattern similar to the 1950s when U.S. heat and drought as well as East Coast land-falling hurricanes were quite prevalent.
The real facts about man-made global warming can be found at real-science.com, wattsupwiththat.com and climatedepot.com. Perhaps when the Atlantic flips cold, we will be hearing Ice Age scares again as  we did in the 1970s.
Joe Bastardi is chief forecaster at WeatherBELL Analytics, a meteorological consulting firm.



Study ties heat waves to global warming



Twenty-four summers ago, NASA scientist James Hansen first warned the world about what he called the dangers of global warming.
In front of a Senate panel, he said he was "99% certain" that a recent warming trend was not a natural variation but caused by a buildup of carbon dioxide and other  gases in the atmosphere from burning fossil fuels.
Now, a study released this weekend by Hansen, the dean of climate scientists, concludes that the recent heat waves and extreme summers likely were caused by climate change.
"We can state, with a high degree of confidence, that extreme anomalies such as those in Texas and Oklahoma in 2011 and Moscow in 2010 were a consequence of global warming, because their likelihood in the absence of global warming was exceedingly small," Hansen and his NASA co-authors write in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
In 2011, Texas and Oklahoma had their hottest summer on record, according to the National Climatic Data Center. The summer of 2010 in much of Russia was the hottest in 130 years of records.
Hansen says the likelihood of such temperatures occurring from the 1950s through the 1980s was rarer than 1 in 300, but now, because of climate change,  the odds are closer to 1 in 10.
Atmospheric scientist Clifford Mass of the University of Washington is highly skeptical of Hansen's findings.
"I can't agree with his conclusions," Mass says, saying there is no evidence that the weather patterns that caused the heat waves were associated with global warming. He says the heat waves were due to large-scale, naturally occurring weather patterns, which he says cannot be linked to climate change.
Also, he says that Hansen's study looks back only to the 1950s, ignoring the heat waves of the 1930s, "which dwarf what we have now," Mass says.
He says there is little doubt Earth is warming from a combination of natural and human  effects,  "but the evidence suggests that the big weather/climate events have little to do with global warming," Mass says.
The  NASA study was written before this year's extreme heat and drought in the USA. Through the end of June, the nation was experiencing  its hottest year on record, according to the data center. July data will be available this week.  For the world as a whole, it has been  the 11th warmest through June.
Contributing: The Associated Press



Resources to prevent global warming already exist


Thank you for your editorial highlighting the need to move from debating climate change to actually doing something to prevent it ("Are this summer's heat records performance-enhanced?", Our view, Climate change debate, Wednesday). In fact, the United States already has a law that could be a potent weapon against greenhouse gas pollution.
The Clean Air Act has reduced harmful air pollution for four decades. Courts have repeatedly upheld efforts to apply the Clean Air Act to greenhouse gases , but the Environmental Protection Agency has been too slow and timid in using the law to control carbon pollution.
For the sake of our planet and our children's future, it's time to put the Clean Air Act to work.
Kassie Siegel, director
Climate Law Institute
Center for Biological Diversity
Joshua Tree, Calif.
Make discrepancies clear
It seems the ongoing debate over "global warming" never gets any simpler.
First, we must realize there is a drastic difference in the meaning of  the terms "climate change" and "global warming." The Earth has been experiencing climate change for all of its 4.5 billion years of existence. Global warming in my opinion refers to  warming caused by the activities of humans.
There is also a tendency for many to think warm temperatures  in the United States must be  global and caused by humans.  Many thought high temperatures this winter were  due to global warming, while at the same time ignoring the fact that Eastern Europe experienced deadly cold that cost hundreds of lives.
If we can't get our terms and facts straight, we can't have an intelligent discussion on this subject. Until we can have an intelligent discussion, the science cannot be settled.
James Moore
Ocean Isle Beach, N.C.
Obama must be strong on climate
Your climate change editorial states, "So it's time for the political debate to shift from whether the climate is changing to what can be done to keep the warming under control." President Obama can shift that debate by coming out firmly in favor of HR 3242, the Save Our Climate Act, which would  steer our country away from fossil fuels toward cleaner forms of energy. This bill would also protect consumers, create hundreds of thousands of jobs and reduce the deficit in the process.
He should also challenge Mitt Romney, who has been all over the place on this issue, to state once and for all his position on the science and explain what he would do if elected to confront the climate challenge.
D.R. Tucker
Brockton, Mass. 



Et cetera; Smart insights on the news of the day


Fred Krupp, The Wall Street Journal: "One scorching summer doesn't confirm that climate change is real any more than a white Christmas proves it's a hoax. What matters is the trend -- a decades-long march toward hotter and wilder weather.  We'll have a much better shot at developing solutions to our climate and energy problems that are good for our economy if leaders from across the political spectrum get re-engaged in the debate. It is time for conservatives to compete with liberals to devise the best, most cost-effective climate solutions. Solving this challenge will require all of us."
Peter Beinart, Newsweek: "Of all the tools used to conduct American foreign policy, perhaps none is as pervasive as the Etch A Sketch. So it was that last week terrorists killed more than 100 people in Iraq -- a country that obsessed us just a few years ago -- and barely anyone in America seemed to notice.  The Iraq War didn't end just because our troops left a little more than six months ago. Hundreds have died, and the number is likely to rise. The war is ongoing and it's horrific, and the least we owe the people whose country we pulverized is to notice. And if we do notice, perhaps we'll be slightly better able to understand why the world doesn't always see us the way we see ourselves." 



After bailout, Detroit owes America fuel efficiency



When President Obama signs tough new auto mileage and emissions standards in coming days, the United States will take the biggest single step of any nation to combat global warming. It's a great deal, but automakers must behave responsibly. If they shun their gas-guzzling ways, they can assure its success.
That means new car gas mileage will nearly double by 2025 to 54.5 mpg from current mileage.
Because better mileage means saving money at the pump, consumers will come out ahead by at least $8,000 per car compared with vehicles on the road today, even after paying the cost of gas-saving technology. The program will halve emissions of carbon dioxide, the biggest contributor to climate change, and cut our risky reliance on oil oligarchs. And, it will create jobs -- 570,000 by 2030, according to the Blue-Green Alliance, a labor and environmental coalition.
Fortunately, this is auto mechanics, not rocket science. The automakers have the improved engines, transmissions and aerodynamics to safely meet the stringent new standards. They have been on Detroit shelves for years.
Greener vehicles are already making money and stepping up the competition among companies: General Motors' top-selling car is the compact 30 mpg Chevrolet Cruze. Ford is about to go grill-to-grill with Toyota, offering its C-Max hybrid station wagon as direct competition for the new 42 mpg Prius V wagon.
That is a good start. Rising phoenix-like, the domestic auto industry now recognizes it is competing in a global market with companies already making hybrids, electric vehicles and other efficient models.
Aided by $80 billion in taxpayer-funded bailouts, it might have begun to learn a crucial lesson: A profitable future lies in clean, high-tech vehicles.
Even so, automakers need to be watched. Even as they signed on to the president's signal environmental achievement, their lobbying won loopholes. The rules set weaker requirements for fleets with larger vehicles, favoring U.S. car companies, which build mostly large models. The standards use a sliding scale based on size  to determine how much each company's fleet must improve mileage and cut emissions.  A company that shifts to big cars from compacts has leeway to produce a fleet that falls  below 54.5 mpg.
This flexibility was the price Detroit demanded to support Obama's program. It is this loophole that gives the companies the power  to determine how successful the  standards turn out to be.
Is the industry ready for this responsibility? Its history gives Americans reason to wonder.
For decades, car makers fought a strong national mileage standard. They pushed thirsty but money-making SUVs and pickups that rarely hauled cargo heavier than a Starbucks latte. Their opposition eased only after they faced stringent emissions rules from California and 12 other states, the challenge of selling gas hogs to drivers paying $4 a gallon, and bankruptcy reorganization brought on largely by relying on trucks consumers shunned.
Having agreed to support a strong national mileage and emissions plan, the auto industry is at a crossroad. It could drive itself back into a ditch, turning out new fleets with the same old gas-guzzlers that ignore what consumers want and the environment needs. Or it could seize the opportunity to turn itself around, taking the wheel as America fights global warming and its oil habit.
After pocketing $80 billion in taxpayer bailouts, Detroit owes us responsible behavior. The U.S. needs to cut its oil addiction. Drivers want to save on gas. We all need a safer climate. Automakers hold the key.
Dan Becker is director of the Safe Climate Campaign, where James Gerstenzang, who covered the environment  for the Los Angeles Times, is editorial director. 



Too much football on TV? Never; College, NFL coverage expands



Each season brings more  televised football --  games and TV time spent analyzing them -- but never an answer to this: Can Americans  get enough?
Maybe we'll find out this season.  The  NFL Network has added  games, Fox becomes the latest  to try to make TV's least-watched night -- Saturday -- into a college football showcase and various channels  have new shows that will make  football yak an even greater cause of global warming.
But don't bet on Americans losing their appetite for NFL and college football.
"These two properties have proven, over years, that they're bulletproof," says Artie Bulgrin, a senior vice president for research at ESPN, which last year agreed to a 64% increase -- to $1.8 billion -- in its annual NFL TV rights fees  through 2021.
That deal includes 500 more hours  of NFL non-game programming. But don't think the professional game is  crowding out ESPN on the college side:  The network's platforms this season will have live coverage of more than 450 games -- up from about 400 last year.
Says  analyst Cris Collinsworth, who last season helped call the most-watched U.S. TV show ever --  the Super Bowl on NBC -- as well as the NFL on NBC Sunday Night Football, which displaced Fox's American Idol  as TV's top-rated series:  "How much more can people take? As much as we give them. They want more and more and more."
Beyond TV, football is already a juggernaut. About 65% of those who watch sports on mobile devices watch football,  recent Harris Interactive/IMRE Research reveals; basketball is second at 42%. And of the 43 college football games Saturday on ESPN,  29 will be on the ESPN3 digital platform.
NFL games  accounted for 23 of the 25 highest-rated TV shows last fall.
"So far, the NFL is such compelling programming it's been pretty much immune to oversaturation. It's the most consistent programming in all of television," CBS Sports chairman Sean McManus says. "It's completely unpredictable. Nobody would have predicted the biggest story of the year would be Tim Tebow. That's what brings so many people back."
As the NFL  has largely stuck to mining ratings gold from a handful of time slots, TV college football  has stretched  across the week, albeit  largely avoiding  Sundays and Mondays.
Fans get a torrent of Saturday afternoon college football starting by noon ET,  while Saturday prime time had traditionally been a TV graveyard. So when ABC in 2005 began airing four Saturday prime-time games, it was  seen as just a small experiment. But as ABC added Saturday prime-time games that consistently won the night in the Nielsen ratings, and ESPN and ESPN2  added more top matchups on Saturday nights, audiences grew: ESPN/ABC Saturday night college audiences have increased by nearly 70% since 2005.
This season, Fox takes on ESPN/ABC games with  weekly Saturday night action -- largely Pac-12 and Big 12 games -- with coverage led by studio host Erin Andrews,  recruited from ESPN.
NBC, after last season airing  Notre Dame's first home night game since 1990, has two this season -- vs. Michigan  on Sept 22 and vs. Miami (Fla.)  at Chicago's Soldier Field on Oct. 6.
While CBS' marquee Southeastern Conference games still largely depend on natural sunlight, that might change: Last season, CBS shifted its monster LSU-Alabama game to prime time, and it became  college football's highest-rated regular-season game. So it's no surprise that Alabama-LSU on Nov. 3 will be under the Saturday night lights.
As coverage of games expands,  coverage beyond games seems limitless. The NFL Network has exhaustive coverage of the NFL combine.  The NFL draft has gone from Saturday matinee to prime-time miniseries. The four Sunday pregame shows,  simultaneously on Fox, CBS, ESPN and NFLN, collectively draw an audience that outstrips those for nearly all non-NFL sports events. And there's no end in sight.
The Pac-12 Network -- following the Big Ten Network and Texas' Longhorn Network --  debuted as the latest conference TV channel. The CBS Sports Network cable channel  has its first official NFL show -- NFL Monday QB, featuring the CBS broadcast network's various ex-quarterbacks-turned-analysts. Such shows need league approval  to use  trademarks and  show game footage outside of regular news shows.
One reason college and pro football can each thrive is that they largely avoid overlap. While the NFL  drew huge ratings in the  top  markets -- hometown audiences for team games can top 40% of local TV households -- TV college football is strongest outside the bright lights of big cities.
Since 2000, the top  TV markets for ESPN college football have been Birmingham, Ala., and Columbus, Ohio;  others  include Knoxville, Tenn., Greenville, S.C., and Oklahoma City.
It's hard to argue with Paul Swangard, who oversees sports business studies at the University of Oregon, on this: TV football "remains the all-you-can-eat-buffet. And it's remarkable that broadcasters can keep turning on more spigots and fans keep drinking."
Hiestand on Twitter: @hiestandusat 



Too much football on TV? Never; College, NFL coverage expands



Each season brings more  televised football --  games and TV time spent analyzing them -- but never an answer to this: Can Americans  get enough?
Maybe we'll find out this season.  The  NFL Network has added  games, Fox becomes the latest  to try to make TV's least-watched night -- Saturday -- into a college football showcase and various channels  have new shows that will make  football yak an even greater cause of global warming.
But don't bet on Americans losing their appetite for NFL and college football.
"These two properties have proven, over years, that they're bulletproof," says Artie Bulgrin, a senior vice president for research at ESPN, which last year agreed to a 64% increase -- to $1.8 billion -- in its annual NFL TV rights fees  through 2021.
That deal includes 500 more hours  of NFL non-game programming. But don't think the professional game is  crowding out ESPN on the college side:  The network's platforms this season will have live coverage of more than 450 games -- up from about 400 last year.
Says  analyst Cris Collinsworth, who last season helped call the most-watched U.S. TV show ever --  the Super Bowl on NBC -- as well as the NFL on NBC Sunday Night Football, which displaced Fox's American Idol  as TV's top-rated series:  "How much more can people take? As much as we give them. They want more and more and more."
Beyond TV, football is already a juggernaut. About 65% of those who watch sports on mobile devices watch football,  recent Harris Interactive/IMRE Research reveals; basketball is second at 42%. And of the 43 college football games Saturday on ESPN,  29 will be on the ESPN3 digital platform.
NFL games  accounted for 23 of the 25 highest-rated TV shows last fall.
"So far, the NFL is such compelling programming it's been pretty much immune to oversaturation. It's the most consistent programming in all of television," CBS Sports chairman Sean McManus says. "It's completely unpredictable. Nobody would have predicted the biggest story of the year would be Tim Tebow. That's what brings so many people back."
As the NFL  has largely stuck to mining ratings gold from a handful of time slots, TV college football  has stretched  across the week, albeit  largely avoiding  Sundays and Mondays.
Fans get a torrent of Saturday afternoon college football starting by noon ET,  while Saturday prime time had traditionally been a TV graveyard. So when ABC in 2005 began airing four Saturday prime-time games, it was  seen as just a small experiment. But as ABC added Saturday prime-time games that consistently won the night in the Nielsen ratings, and ESPN and ESPN2  added more top matchups on Saturday nights, audiences grew: ESPN/ABC Saturday night college audiences have increased by nearly 70% since 2005.
This season, Fox takes on ESPN/ABC games with  weekly Saturday night action -- largely Pac-12 and Big 12 games -- with coverage led by studio host Erin Andrews,  recruited from ESPN.
NBC, after last season airing  Notre Dame's first home night game since 1990, has two this season -- vs. Michigan  on Sept 22 and vs. Miami (Fla.)  at Chicago's Soldier Field on Oct. 6.
While CBS' marquee Southeastern Conference games still largely depend on natural sunlight, that might change: Last season, CBS shifted its monster LSU-Alabama game to prime time, and it became  college football's highest-rated regular-season game. So it's no surprise that Alabama-LSU on Nov. 3 will be under the Saturday night lights.
As coverage of games expands,  coverage beyond games seems limitless. The NFL Network has exhaustive coverage of the NFL combine.  The NFL draft has gone from Saturday matinee to prime-time miniseries. The four Sunday pregame shows,  simultaneously on Fox, CBS, ESPN and NFLN, collectively draw an audience that outstrips those for nearly all non-NFL sports events. And there's no end in sight.
The Pac-12 Network -- following the Big Ten Network and Texas' Longhorn Network --  debuted as the latest conference TV channel. The CBS Sports Network cable channel  has its first official NFL show -- NFL Monday QB, featuring the CBS broadcast network's various ex-quarterbacks-turned-analysts. Such shows need league approval  to use  trademarks and  show game footage outside of regular news shows.
One reason college and pro football can each thrive is that they largely avoid overlap. While the NFL  drew huge ratings in the  top  markets -- hometown audiences for team games can top 40% of local TV households -- TV college football is strongest outside the bright lights of big cities.
Since 2000, the top  TV markets for ESPN college football have been Birmingham, Ala., and Columbus, Ohio;  others  include Knoxville, Tenn., Greenville, S.C., and Oklahoma City.
It's hard to argue with Paul Swangard, who oversees sports business studies at the University of Oregon, on this: TV football "remains the all-you-can-eat-buffet. And it's remarkable that broadcasters can keep turning on more spigots and fans keep drinking."
Hiestand on Twitter: @hiestandusat 



In Portland, bikes rule the road; The Oregon metro area has embraced spokes and pedals, perhaps paving a path for a nation on the move



America spent 50 years and billions of dollars after World War II redesigning itself so that cars could move people across this vast country more quickly.
Now, with many cities in gridlock, one-third  of the population obese and climate change forcing innovators to look beyond  the internal combustion engine, cities are beginning to rethink that push toward the automobile.
Perhaps no place has thought about it more than Portland, rated America's most bike-friendly city this year by Bicycling magazine and the only large U.S. city to earn "platinum status" from the League of American Bicyclists. City planners, businesses and, yes, the citizens of this Pacific Northwest city have embraced a shifting of gears designed to enhance the quality of urban living with a nod to the environment.
At the street level, many Portlanders go about their daily lives in ways that would be unfamiliar to most Americans.  Downtown and near-city neighborhoods are awash in bikes and bike lanes, delivery bikes dot the urban landscape  and bars aren't encased in massive parking lots -- they have bike corrals out front.
Portland  boasts that  6% of all trips to work are by bike, the highest percentage of bike commuters in any large U.S. city, says Dan Anderson of the Portland Bureau of Transportation.
Even kids get around differently. Nationally, only 13% of children walk or bike to school, according to the National Household Travel Survey. Here,  31% do, in part because of a program that gives every public school student between fourth and 10th grade a 12-week course on how to ride a bicycle safely.
For Tree Marie WoodSmith, the evolution here  has already made "life so incredibly easier." She and her husband moved to Portland from rural California where "to go anywhere you had to get into your car." Portland is the opposite, she says. Now WoodSmith can go "days on end and never even get in a car. It was pretty amazing."
This self-declared  Bicycle Capital of the nation is even drawing  fact-finding missions from other cities and nations. Indeed, groups arrive almost weekly to pedal the streets and hear from city staff how Portland has accomplished what no other major U.S. city has: getting people out of their cars and onto the bike paths coursing through this hilly metropolis. (This summer alone, groups from Seattle, San Francisco, Philadelphia, New York City, Washington, D.C., Holland, Japan and South Korea made the trek.)
From Los Angeles to Washington, D.C., cities across the country are hopping on the bike bandwagon.  Next year, New York, Chicago and San Francisco will join Portland in launching major bike-share programs that allow citizens to  rent a bike for an hour or a day from convenient kiosks.
But Portland's will come with "this amazing, safe, connected, intuitive bikeway network. We have signs all over, our drivers know how to coexist with bikes -- we've really teed it up,"  Anderson says.  Portland, he says, is simply paving the path for what he believes the rest of the country will do in the coming years.
A little rain? No problem
Portland's famous rainy climate isn't a limitation to serious bikers, Anderson says. The weather is more temperate than many people believe. "We don't have heavy rainstorms; we don't have snowstorms and blizzards," he says. "Yes, it rains eight months a year, but most of the time it's just a drizzle."
People are more inclined to bike in the summer, when Portland enjoys warm, dry weather, but the city's annual biking count doesn't measure the differences, he says. The development of Gore-Tex and other lightweight rain gear has helped a lot. "There's no such thing as bad weather, only bad gear," Anderson says.
While Portland has been officially pro-bike since the 1970s, the real transformation has happened in only the past decade or so, Anderson says. It came about because Portland focused on building safe, low-traffic bikeways that serve as  arterials through town and "bicycle boulevards" in neighborhoods that feed into them. Today more than 60% of Portland homes are within a half-mile of a neighborhood bikeway; in 2006, only 29% were.
All of this has helped Portland's economy, too, fostering a growing concentration of bicycle builders, manufacturers and retailers that have brought jobs, and young workers, to town.  A slew of bike-friendly businesses "prioritize bike access and bike parking, making it easy to ride to work or to your favorite restaurant," says Margaux Mennesson of the Bicycle Transportation Alliance.
All this positive reinforcement is working. Between 2010 and 2011, bike ridership grew 6.4%, and on the new neighborhood bike boulevards the numbers jumped 61%, she says.
The transformation is visible on the streets and especially apparent to those who once lived in a very different Portland.  Kristin Flynn grew up here  but now lives in Stone Ridge, N.Y. The 58-year-old artist was back this summer, and what she saw stunned her.  She has friends who do their grocery shopping by bike and others who are considering giving up their cars altogether. "It's just so easy," Flynn says. "The bike lanes, the routes, the signs. It's not like this in New York."
The city is so bike-friendly that when auto club AAA sought suggestions from Portlanders, roadside service for bicycles was one of the biggest requests. They launched the service in 2009, AAA's Marie Dodds says. Oregon and neighboring Washington are the only states offering it.
Cars vs. bikes
The shift in the city's streets isn't always smooth, though. Bicyclists complain about cars not being respectful of them as vehicles. Drivers complain that people on bikes act like they don't have to follow the rules of the road.
"I was driving last night, and there was this guy coming down the hill without a light, and I almost hit him," says Tom Dietz, 58, a Portland emergency room physician. He rides a bike but says some bikers -- just like some drivers -- simply don't obey the laws.
More people on bikes does mean more accidents, though. Portland figures show that there were 265 crashes in 2008, 287 in 2009 and 321 in 2010, the last year for which data are available.
Very little data are available on bicycle injuries. Even so, a 2010 study found that among Portland bike commuters, approximately 20% experienced an injury over the course of a year's commuting, though only 5% required medical attention.
Caryl Taylor is a hospice nurse who drives across  the region caring for dying patients. She loves Portland's neighborhoods but lives across the Columbia River in Vancouver, Wash., partly because while Portland is "a great place to bike, it's a very dangerous and unsafe place to drive."
Far too many cyclists are almost militantly anti-car -- and poor cyclists to boot, she says. "They'll decide to ride against traffic, or they'll weave in and out of the cars," and if a driver looks at them funny? "They'll flip you off. They'll yell at you. Their attitude is, 'We own the road!'" she says.
John Pucher, co-author of City Cycling, knows the kinds of people Taylor is talking about. Though bad riders are a tiny proportion of cyclists, he says, they give the rest a bad name
Pucher, a professor of urban planning at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, New Jersey, points out that cyclists -- the law-abiding and those who aren't -- are frequently subject to harassment. Cyclists nationwide complain of  shouted obscenities, rude gestures, thrown objects, near-collisions and attempts to drive them off the road.
Here, too, Portland -- where people are famously friendly  -- might be an exception. That visceral anger that bikers elsewhere in the country describe as a constant threat on the roadways isn't such an issue here, says Rob Sadowsky, executive director of the Bicycle Transportation Alliance. "We're making strides here. A lot of people who drive cars also bike, and we have places for the people to bike so that we minimize those interactions. And maybe it's just your basic Portland politeness."
The biking infrastructure
The cyclists most Americans see on the road have historically been  male, young and aggressive, says Jeff Mapes, Portland author of Pedaling Revolution: How Cyclists Are Changing American Cities. But who is biking, and how they're biking, is beginning to change as biking shifts from a fitness regime or political statement to simply a way to get from Point A to Point B.
Having the bike paths to make that A-to-B trip is what makes Portland such a biking haven.  After 20 years of building, it now has a network of bike lanes, including:
Cycle tracks. These bike lanes are physically separated from motor vehicle lanes by concrete barriers or curbs. Pucher says cycle tracks can increase bicycle ridership 18% to 20%, especially among women and children.
Bike lanes. These painted lanes on streets provide no physical separation from cars.
Sharrows. "Sharing arrows" street markings show an outline of a bicycle and two arrows pointing forward, indicating that bicycles and cars both have full use of the lane.
Bicycle boulevards. Also called neighborhood greenways, these residential  streets are marked for both bikes and cars and have a speed limit of 20 mph.
Most of what's been created so far has been relatively simple, requiring only paint and a few concrete barriers.
The infrastructure Portland is developing now will displace more cars and cost more money. The Portland-Milwaukie bridge over the Willamette River, currently under construction, will be open only to mass transit, bikes and pedestrians. Price tag: $135 million.
Pucher, the Rutgers professor, says the key is to create some bike infrastructure and gradually expand it while getting more cyclists on the road. That way, bikes become an accepted and acceptable means of transportation.
"You don't all of a sudden put in 500 miles of bike lanes," Pucher says. A bike lane here, a bike crossing there, one route and then two and then five slowly create the infrastructure.
In the end, planners in Portland aren't trying to force people out of their cars, says Jennifer Dill, director of the Oregon Transportation Research and Education Consortium at Portland State University. Their goal is to give people choices.
"In many cities you have no choice -- you have to drive to work," she says. "Here, you have a choice. What we've found is that given an array of choices -- driving, taking the bus, biking or walking -- a lot of people will choose other options than driving."
---
Biking in Portland, by the numbers
4
Size, in stories, of the mural in downtown proclaiming the city "America's Bicycle Capital"
319
Miles of bike routes
6%
Percentage of bicycle commuters
17,000
Workers who commute by bicycle
5,000
Number of publicly installed bike racks
87
Number of multibike corrals in on-street parking spaces
20
Speed limit, in miles per hour, for all vehicles on bike boulevards
31%
Percentage of children who walk or ride bikes to school
321
Bike crashes in 2010
 



Summer 2012 was the USA's third-hottest; Scientist says season's widespread heat may signal climate change



The USA just endured its third-hottest summer on record, and it looks like the fall is on track to be warmer than average too, scientists reported Monday.
For the entire year to date, the nation is having its warmest year since records began in 1895,  said the report by the National Climatic Data Center in Asheville, N.C.
About 80 million Americans sweltered through 100-degree temperatures at some point this summer, the climate center noted in its report.
The warmth should continue for much of the nation over the next several months: "We're looking at a warmer-than-average fall," especially east of the Rockies,  AccuWeather meteorologist Jack Boston said.
He adds that cooler-than-average temperatures should be confined to the far west this fall, however, with mountain snows possible by early October.
With the El Nio climate pattern now in effect, "the best chances for above-normal temperatures this fall are in the northern tier of the nation," mainly east of the Rockies,  forecaster Jon Gottschalck of the Climate Prediction Center said.
El Nio is a periodic warming of Pacific Ocean water temperatures that influences weather in the USA and around the world.
The summer heat this year really ramped up in July, which ended up as the hottest month in U.S. history.
"The heat was widespread in July," scientist Jake Crouch of the National Climatic Data Center said. The worst of the heat eased a bit in August, he said, which prevented the summer from being the hottest on record.
The climate center defines summer as June 1-Aug. 31. Seven of the 10 hottest summers in U.S. history have occurred since 2000, and the nation has experienced its  second- and  third-warmest summers in back-to-back years.
This may be a signal of climate change: "All of this fits into the longer-term warming trend," Crouch told the environmental group Climate Central.
Other highlights of  this summer:
The average U.S. temperature during the summer  was 74.4 degrees, which was 2.3 degrees above the long-term (1901-2000) average. Only 1936, at 74.6 degrees, and 2011, at 74.5 degrees, were warmer.
Two states -- Colorado and Wyoming -- had their warmest summer on record.
As for rainfall, the nation saw extremes this summer:  Nebraska and Wyoming had their driest summer on record, while Florida had its wettest summer.
---
Sultry summers
Seven of the 10 hottest U.S. summers have occurred since 2000. Average summer temperatures:

Source: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 



City living will feel like a blast from the past the modern metropolis has become a monster



In the next American metropolis, people will live in smaller homes, relax in smaller yards, park their smaller cars in smaller spots. They will be closer to work, to play and, above all, to one another.
Global warming will be a fait accompli in 30 years, and so these urban Americans will raise their own food, in fields and on rooftops, and build structures to withstand everything from hurricane winds to Formosan termites.
They will walk and ride more and drive less. And they will like it.
This is the future envisioned by Andres Duany, architect, town planner, teacher and polemicist. And the future, he will tell you, is his business.
"It's my job to think ahead," he says. "People say you can't predict the future because they're experts in the present, and the present is a distortion field."
Duany has a track record of prescience. Three decades ago he created the plan for this Panhandle beach town, arguably the most influential settlement since Levittown's opening on Long Island sparked suburbia's sprawl in 1947.
He designed Seaside as a rebuke to Levittown. Duany aimed to revive civic sociability and reduce dependence on cars by mixing homes, offices, stores and play areas in a tight grid of streets, paths and squares. Seaside's old-town look, displayed in the 1998 film The Truman Show, was no accident; front porches and picket fences were required by code, and lawns, artificial siding and attached garages were forbidden.
Duany went on to co-found the planning movement New Urbanism, which advocates communities based on the pedestrian and mass transit instead of the car and highways. Although only a fraction of new construction over the past two decades fit that prescription, New Urbanism had gained momentum when the housing bubble popped.
The bust succeeded in doing what New Urbanism had not: stopping suburban sprawl  and drastically reducing the value of much of what had been built on the metropolitan periphery.
When construction picks up, says Robert Lang, who teaches urban affairs at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas, New Urbanism will take the lead. In the Washington, D.C., area, partly insulated from the downturn by federal spending, compact settlements near mass-transit stations already are the  norm.
Duany and the New Urbanists have their critics. Demographer Joel Kotkin of Southern California's Chapman University argues that the convenience of the car and the suburb ensures their continued dominance over mass transit and city centers. And British architecture critic Jonathan Glancey has called New Urbanism "holier-than-thou" in its presumption that planners know best.
But no one questions the influence of Duany, whom Lang calls  "a guru of the new metropolis."
At 63, Duany has been spending less time on specific projects at the Miami-based practice he founded with his wife, Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk. He has been thinking about the next 30 years, because "that's how long it takes for an urban vision to be realized."
Duany says that to see the future, you have to "translate" the present. He's sitting in a chic pizzeria near the beach in Seaside when he sees something out the window that illustrates his point.
"A teenager with a skateboard drives here with $3 to spend and parks all day for free," he says. "At the moment, people say, 'Cool, man, it shows kids want to come to Seaside.' But I translate that as a future problem, when merchants are up in arms because parking is being dominated by one kid in a car."
Indeed, as he speaks, the town designed as a pedestrian paradise is preparing to introduce  valet parking.
Duany believes that soon,  Americans -- despite their inveterate optimism -- will realize they're in a pickle. Energy costs aren't coming down and personal incomes aren't going up; global warming won't be stopped; government is impoverished; civil unrest is not out of the question.
New Urbanism, which proposes to cure the metropolis of its sprawling, polluting, time-wasting, class-segregating, bankrupting ways, "is perfectly positioned," he says. "It's what the doctor ordered for the next 30 years."
The future he envisions looks less like the present and more like the past:
1 Urban retrofit for suburbia
Americans have heard much about, and seen little of, the urbanization of the suburbs. That will change, Duany says;  people really will start living closer together, because economics will trump consumer preferences and developer habits.
Much of what Duany calls "conventional suburbia" -- the sprawl of cul-de-sacs, shopping centers, office parks and highways that covers about 70% of the metropolis -- will be literally rebuilt to accommodate pedestrians, cyclists and mass transit.
Homes and yards will be smaller. Townhouses, walk-up apartment houses and cottages will be more common, detached single-family houses less common. Government taxes and subsidies, which once favored highways and bridges, will go toward projects such as converting a shopping mall and its parking lot to a town center surrounded by housing.
Despite urbanization, the old suburbia will endure. Duany estimates that at least 40% of homebuyers will favor big houses on big lots with a few cars.
"I had someone ask me, 'Why would I want to know my neighbor?'" Duany marvels. "Someone else said, 'No drive-thrus? Have you ever unstrapped a kid out of a car seat?'"
But as much they might like conventional suburbia, many people will not be able to afford it. So they'll try New Urbanism, Duany says, and they'll like it -- shorter commutes, more vital street life, less money wasted on gas and home heating and cooling.
"You have to work hard to support a conventional suburban lifestyle," he says. "People will be pleased by how much they'll be able to ease off."
2 Gardener on the roof
Americans love to garden. In the future, Duany says, some will live in communities organized around growing food in a variety of settings, including farm fields, community gardens, rooftop plots and window boxes.
What he calls "agrarian urbanism" will reorganize the traditional farming village so "lawn-mowing, food-importing suburbanites" can enjoy the benefits of planting, harvesting and animal husbandry without hardships such as social isolation and a sore back.
Because less food will be shipped long distances, it will taste better and leave a smaller carbon footprint. All residents need to contribute, Duany says, are their "hands, minds, surplus time and discretionary entertainment budgets."
In his scheme, a shopping center might become a market square; its roof would sprout gardens; commercially zoned space on its periphery would be cleared for planting; its ring road would become an irrigation canal.
Duany says agrarian urbanism won't be for everyone but would appeal to those who think it's the right thing to do; to trend-setters who think it's cool; to pragmatists who want to save or make a buck; and to survivalists who want to be living in a self-sufficient community when things start to fall apart.
3 Government goes hyper-local
Because land use will become a crucial question as the metropolis becomes more urban, Duany expects local bodies to become more powerful.
These planning boards, community associations and neighborhood groups will have to resolve conflicts between developers and planners who want to make suburbs denser, and environmentalist and not-in-my-back-yard  forces who oppose such changes.
Here's the sort of conflict local officials will face: Unless people are willing to live in compact communities, Duany warns, environmentalists can't stop nature from being overrun by development.
4 Buildings that look cool and safe
Twenty minutes east of Seaside on the Gulf Coast is a striking sight: a development, unfinished because of the economic collapse, where all the buildings, including the cement tile roofs, are painted stark white to reflect sunlight. They're made of concrete and steel to resist hurricane winds and "super-termites" that may arrive as the climate changes. Their windows can withstand a wind-borne projectile with the force of a gunshot.
Streets are cobblestone and gravel to reduce runoff.
This is Alys Beach, known in the trade as a "fortified" community. Duany -- who designed its master plan -- says it's the look of the future.
When Americans finally face the effects of global warming, he says, it will be important to have an architecture "that looks different, not just works different. I'm trying to get a new aesthetic developed." He says the market will demand it: "When you buy real estate, you want to be ready for the future. It's the first and only time most people take the long-run look."
5 Mormon settlers as models
Many people think 19th-century Mormons were remarkable for their practice of polygamy. Duany thinks they were remarkable for their town planning. While working on a community plan in Utah, Duany discovered that in about 50 years, Mormons established 537 towns.
"The Mormons were always transcending the present," he says. "That's how they made something out of nothing" in an arid region bypassed by most who headed west. Some Western towns were settled simply because on a particular day, pioneers were too tired to go on. But Mormons spent up to a year studying a potential town site, testing soil, wind and water.
To Duany, that precision planning explains the success of settlers who had nothing other than free land.  And he says placemakers of the future -- when land will be relatively cheap and money tight -- should take note. 



Devasted by drought


LETTERS
I was  stunned to read the  article "Dateline: Drought, USA" and not see a single mention of climate change (Cover Story, News, Friday). The question to be posed is, "If Republicans got it wrong about climate change, who will pay for the clean up?" Answer: You and I will, with higher taxes and higher commodities prices. It is irresponsible to print this article without mention of the likely causation of the possible "third-costliest natural disaster in U.S. history."  Instead, it ends with a rosy idea: What goes around comes around. Ridiculous.
James Marquardt
Missoula, Mont.
I was born and raised in Lawrenceville, Ill. My siblings and I grew up with the children of farmers.  I remember the hot spells we got in the summer, but they were just spells, not three-month events. The heatwaves of the past two summers have been unbelievable.
I was in Lawrenceville the last week of June this year, and the temperature was at least 100 degrees  for several days.  Of course, at that time, while the heat was unbearable, we didn't know what was to come. My heart goes out to everyone who has experienced loss in this drought.
Judy Supinie
Blairsville, Ga.
FACEBOOK
The U.S. should build a nationwide reservoir  to transfer flood waters from flood areas to drought areas. It would take a decade or two, and would cost billions.  Yet it would put thousands of people to work, and could serve to lessen flooding and droughts in the future, as well as assist in firefighting.
Dan Doughty
Extremes of rain, drought and heat  are all to be expected because of global warming. In the near future, your choice will be "business as usual" or farmland that can grow crops. It's one or the other -- choose.
Valerie Plumb
I live here in the  Midwest, and the drought is bad. The rivers where my friends and I used to go fishing are dried up.  I haven't caught a catfish or white bass all year.
Michael Durh-am 



Weather disasters target N. America; Report: Climate change drives increased havoc



The number of natural disasters per year has been rising dramatically on all continents since 1980, but most notably  in North America where countries have been battered by hurricanes, tornadoes, floods, searing heat and drought, a new report says.
The study being released today by Munich Re, the world's largest reinsurance firm, sees climate change driving the increase and predicts more disasters  ahead. Making the link to climate change will likely add to the debate on global warming, its causes, consequences, and costs, which  often fall to insurance firms to cover.
Whatever the causes, the report shows that if you thought the weather's been getting worse, you're right.
"North America is the continent with the largest increases in disasters," says Munich Re's Peter Roder.
The report focuses on weather disasters since 1980 in the United States, Canada, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
Roder argues  this report represents the first finding of a climate change "footprint" in the data from natural catastrophes.
Among the report's findings:
Insured losses in the USA due to thunderstorms alone in 2011 were the highest on record at an estimated $26billion, more than double the previous record set in 2010.
Insured losses from disasters globally averaged $9 billion a year in the 1980s. By the 2000s, the average soared to $36 billion per year. The costliest weather disasters in the USA since 1980, as defined by insured losses, have all been hurricanes, led by Katrina in 2005 ($62 billion) and Ike in 2008 ($18 billion).
Reinsurers such as Munich Re offer backup policies to companies writing primary insurance policies. That spreads risk, so the system can handle large losses from natural disasters.
Other experts take issue with Munich Re's findings.
"Thirty years is not an appropriate length of time for a climate analysis, much less finding causal factors like climate change," says Roger Pielke, a professor of environmental studies at the University of Colorado.
Atmospheric scientist Clifford Mass of the University of Washington  says once data are adjusted for population there is no recent upward trend in tornado or hurricane damages.
Roder says that even adjusting for population spread and increased property values, Munich Re still sees  significant increases in the costs of weather disasters over the past few years. 



Study: Forecast of more severe tornadoes is all wind



As 2012 shapes up to be the least active year on record for tornadoes, new research suggests climate change is not necessarily driving up the number and force of killer twisters .
The research, accepted for publication in the journal Environmental Hazards, counters assertions that climate change is fueling this form of severe weather. The findings are limited to tornadoes and don't delve into whether climate change could be affecting other weather extremes such as heat waves, floods or droughts.
"There is absolutely no evidence of an increase in damaging tornadoes," the authors write in the study. They add that the number of U.S. tornadoes might actually have decreased since accurate records began in the 1950s.
On average, just over 1,300 tornadoes form each year in the United States, the vast majority of which cause very little or no damage.
Roger Pielke, a professor of environmental studies at the University of Colorado, led the study, working with  Kevin  Simmons of Austin College in Sherman, Texas, and Daniel Sutter of Troy University in Troy, Ala.
As awful as 2011 was, when 550 Americans died in tornadoes, last year appears to have been an outlier and not part of a trend. Tornadoes and tornado damage can fluctuate wildly from year to year.
The study also finds the damage from tornadoes has decreased since the 1950s, once the figures are "normalized," or adjusted for inflation and population. This is the first paper to comprehensively "normalize" historical economic losses from U.S. tornadoes, Pielke says.
Harold Brooks of the National Severe Storms Laboratory in Norman, Okla., says the study is " pretty reasonable,"  adding that there is no sign that tornado incidence has worsened over the decades. "There is no long-term trend in tornadoes," he says.
Meteorologist Mike Smith of AccuWeather Enterprise Solutions in Wichita, agrees.  "I believe there is some evidence (but not enough to form a robust conclusion) that tornadoes were worse in the first half of the 20th century," he says.
Even so, Smith  acknowledges that "2011 sticks out like a sore thumb."
When it comes to climate change, Pielke adds that his study "provides strong counter-evidence to claims  in the scientific literature that the atmospheric environment that spawns tornadoes has intensified," leading to more destructive  storms.
An Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report this year said  "there is low confidence" in a link between climate change and tornadoes.
Pielke's study counters a report  this month by Munich Re, the world's largest reinsurance firm, that said climate change is driving the increase in natural disasters, such as the severe storms and tornadoes that hammered the United States last year. 



Romney's shift to the middle leaves voters wondering


As head of the Winter Olympics organizing committee in 2002, Mitt Romney undoubtedly saw ice skaters executing double flips. Now Romney, in his bid for the White House, is attempting a similar move.
Between his governorship of Massachusetts (2003-07) and his successful run for the Republican presidential nomination this year, Romney shifted sharply to the right on an array of issues, including abortion, gun control, climate change, immigration and health care. Had he done otherwise, his chances of winning over skeptical conservatives who control the party were zero.
More recently, in the closing weeks of the campaign, Romney  has veered back toward the center. He has begun emphasizing that his tax cuts wouldn't produce a windfall for the wealthy. He has tempered his harsh criticism of the auto bailout. And, most strikingly, in Monday's debate he toned down his bellicose foreign-policy rhetoric, frequently invoking the word "peace" and embracing several of President Obama's policies. On Afghanistan, for instance, he said that he would support a fixed timetable for withdrawing U.S. troops, an idea he previously derided.
To some degree, this is par for the course in American politics, where candidates tack to their party's ideological edge to get the nomination, then shift toward the center in a bid for independent votes. Nor is the nation well-served by politicians who never change their minds, even in the face of new facts.
But Romney has moved back and forth more abruptly, and on more issues, than most candidates,  leaving voters to sort conviction from  opportunism. Would President Romney govern as moderate Mitt from Massachusetts? Or the self-described "severely conservative" Mitt from the Republican primaries?
Odd as it might seem, the answer is: probably both.
Romney's pedigree as the son of a moderate Michigan governor, and his background in business and Massachusetts politics, suggests a pragmatic streak and an ability to work across party lines. But as president, Romney would still have to accommodate all factions of his party.
It's a safe bet that he would give the party's social conservatives what they want most -- staunchly conservative judicial appointments -- despite his former support of Roe vs. Wade. And he surely would fulfill his commitment to roll back ObamaCare, even though it was modeled on the plan he implemented in Massachusetts. A push for lower tax rates would be a certainty, but whether he'd shrink government enough to match remains to be seen. George W. Bush and Ronald Reagan borrowed instead.
That's conservative Mitt. He's a follower of the tribe. The more interesting question is whether moderate Mitt could lead Tea Partiers to do what they've steadfastly rejected -- compromise with Democrats to get the nation's fiscal house in order. If he can't, he'd get only paralysis as Democrats adopted the Republicans' recent blocking tactics.
On foreign policy, where the president dominates and party matters less, Romney remains more of a mystery, like other governors who've sought the White House. During the primaries, his tone was resolutely hawkish, but at the last debate he said he'd resort to military force only as a last resort. The outcome may depend on who has his ear -- neoconservatives like those who prodded Bush into the Iraq War or realists less prone to using force. Romney has advisers from both camps.
In any event, the surest way for voters to reconcile Romney's debate season gyrations is to recognize that they're voting not just for a president but for a party as well.
This is first of two editorials on the presidential candidates. Friday: President Obama's second-term agenda. 



Obama, Romney spar on climate, energy; Rivals once thought alike



He pushed to make homes and businesses more energy efficient. He offered government incentives for renewable power and, early in his administration, tried to tackle climate change with fees on excessive corporate emitters of greenhouse gases.
President Obama? Well, it may sound like him, but it's GOP presidential candidate Mitt Romney when he was governor of Massachusetts -- a blue state with a Democratic-led legislature -- from 2003 to 2007.
The two men have fairly similar governing records on energy and environmental issues. Their campaign rhetoric, however, has differed on just about everything except boosting the nation's production of oil and natural gas.
Obama says the United States, despite a jump in oil and gas produced during his administration, cannot drill its way to energy independence. So he touts his push to double fuel economy for new cars and light trucks by 2025, increase solar and wind energy, and eliminate $4 billion in annual tax breaks for oil and gas companies.
Romney, who says the key to his goal of North American energy independence by 2020 is more drilling, favors those tax breaks. He opposes tax credits for large wind producers, which Obama says he'll renew so they don't expire Dec. 31.
Romney supports the entire Keystone XL oil pipeline from Canada to Texas, the northern half of which Obama has so far declined to approve.
"There's a big difference" between the two candidates, says David Kreutzer, an energy expert at the Heritage Foundation, a conservative think tank. "There's an anti-fossil fuel thrust with this administration that would change" under Romney.
"When it comes to our energy future, voters have a clear choice," agrees Heather Taylor-Miesle, director of the NRDC Action Fund, an environmental advocacy group. "Romney's fossil-fuels-first approach is nothing more than drill, baby, drill -- with a nice haircut," she writes, adding that Obama has supported oil drilling to an extent that her group finds "excessive."
Romney as governor
What puzzles  some analysts, in comparing the two candidates, is Romney's past. His record as governor differs markedly from his presidential campaign positions.
"There's a lot of similarity" between Romney's record as governor and Obama's as president, says Kateri Callahan of the Alliance to Save Energy, a non-profit group that advocates energy efficiency. She applauds both men for the work they've done.
"He (Romney) really did drive energy efficiency into the Massachusetts economy," Callahan says, noting he backed tax credits -- up to $600 for individuals -- for homes and businesses to make efficiency upgrades.
She says he also supported efficiency and renewable energy projects, investing $15 million of state money into the Massachusetts Green Energy Fund LP, a venture-capital firm that helped finance about a dozen companies. Three of those companies have since gone under, including solar panel manufacturer Konarka, which received $1.5 million.
Romney, who once stood in front of a coal plant and said it "kills people," launched a Climate Protection Plan in 2004 to reduce industrial greenhouse gas emissions as part of -- in his words -- a "no regrets" policy toward climate change.
His staff drafted the country's first interstate cap-and-trade system to cut emissions, known as the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative or RGGI. By the time RGGI was ready for his signature in late 2005, he had announced he wouldn't seek re-election, prompting speculation he might run for president. He declined to sign it, citing potential costs to state businesses.
Romney struck a balance as governor, says Brian Gilmore of the Associated Industries of Massachusetts, the state's largest organization of employers. "He certainly wasn't anti-environment, but he was concerned about potential regulations and their impact on employers," says Gilmore, who was glad that Romney walked away from RGGI.
His gubernatorial record is "kind of a tale of two stories," says David Jenkins of ConservAmerica, a GOP environmental group. He says Romney was very pro-environment in his first two years but later got "cold feet" on some initiatives such as RGGI. "He now sounds more like Rush Limbaugh than Ronald Reagan," says Jenkins, adding he won't vote for him.
Obama's record
Yet Jenkins says he also won't support Obama, citing disappointment that Obama didn't push hard enough to win Congress' approval of federal cap-and-trade legislation. The bill passed the House but faltered in the Senate.
Obama has a mixed record with environmentalists. He's been criticized for pulling back an EPA proposal to limit ozone emissions linked to smog, approving the southern half of the Keystone XL pipeline and failing to create new wilderness areas that would be protected from development.
They've lauded his support of renewable energy, which has doubled its U.S. production since 2008, his mandate for doubling vehicle fuel-efficiency and his EPA rules limiting carbon-dioxide emissions from new power plants, including coal-fired ones.
These rules have caused Obama heartburn on the campaign trail. Campaigning in coal country, where the president's popularity has plummeted, Romney has blamed Obama's EPA for putting coal miners out of work.
"The regulations may have long-term impact" on the coal industry, but recent mine closures are due more to the plunge in prices for natural gas that make coal less cost-competitive, says Ted Boettner, executive director of the West Virginia Center on Budget and Policy, a non-partisan research group.
---
Comparing five key issues
1. Oil/gas drilling
Obama: Rejected the initial northern half of the Keystone XL pipeline, which would run from Canada to Texas, but deferred a final decision. Proposed opening more offshore areas to oil and gas drilling but maintains moratorium off the Pacific and most of the Atlantic coasts. Seeks federal safety standards for hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, a process by which natural gas is extracted. Opposes $4 billion in annual tax breaks for oil and gas companies.
Romney: Approves of Keystone XL pipeline. Favors giving states the ability to regulate drilling and issue leases (even on federal land). Supports opening all federal land for oil and gas drilling, including the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge and the Pacific, Atlantic and Alaskan coasts. Backs tax credits for manufacturers, including oil and gas companies.
2. Renewable energy
Obama: Favors renewal of the tax credit for utility-scale wind producers, slated to expire Dec. 31. Supports loan guarantees and grants for green-energy companies.
Romney: Opposes the renewal of the wind tax credit. Criticizes Obama's stimulus bill funding for solar, wind and electric vehicle companies.
3. Vehicle fuel efficiency
Obama: Finalized plans, with support of major automakers, to double fuel economy for light trucks and cars, to 54.5 miles per gallon, by 2025.
Romney: Opposes Obama's efficiency mandate, saying consumers will have to spend more on cars than they'll save by using less gas.
4. Clean air
Obama: Supports the authority of the Environmental Protection Agency, upheld by the Supreme Court, to regulate greenhouse gas emissions. Backs tougher rules for limiting emissions from old coal-fired power plants.
Romney: Seeks to eliminate EPA's power to regulate carbon dioxide and remove its rules limiting emissions from coal plants. "I exhale carbon dioxide," he said in November in New Hampshire. "I don't want those guys (EPA) following me around with a meter to see if I'm breathing too hard."
5. Climate change
Obama: Believes it's serious, exacerbated by fossil fuel use and linked to extreme weather. "Climate change is not a hoax," he told the Democratic National Convention last month in Charlotte, N.C. "More droughts and floods and wildfires are not a joke. They are a threat to our children's future."
Romney: Argues there's a lack of scientific consensus on the issue. "We don't know what's causing climate change on this planet," he told the Consol Energy Center last October. 



After Sandy, searching for climate change answers


Before visiting storm-damaged New York last week, President Obama encouraged Congress to address climate change issues.
Taxing carbon emissions is not the answer. Capturing carbon dioxide is.  If you really want to solve this once and for all, develop a national energy policy. Utilize our current resources, add a surtax to produce the revenues for carbon capture and bring on the new technologies such as hydrogen production, storage and distribution. We have no plan, we haven't had a plan for more than  40 years and eight  presidents. I am not confident Obama gets it either.
Edward W. Greenlee
Really, the Obama administration is  worried about climate change? I think  controlling spending and not raising  taxes are more important.
@Colvin33P
Climate change is a real issue that needs to be dealt with.
There is no way that we can continue to  pump so much harmful  material into the atmosphere and just expect it to have no effect and disappear.
Bruce Mort
Building codes for Eastern shoreline zones will need to increase. To end storm surge damage, design heights must increase to at least 14 feet.
@shoreline12
It's sad that it takes something as serious as superstorm  Sandy to  make us return our attention to something as damaging as climate change.  #letsgetserious
@jacobhibb 



'Chasing Ice' catches time-lapse realities of melting glaciers; Photographer on a mission faced frostbite, foxes



Photographer James Balog set out to film climate change by placing two dozen time-lapse cameras throughout the Arctic. The result, aside from frostbitten fingers and a near helicopter crash, are stunning images of melting glaciers.
His footage is captured in Chasing Ice, a 75-minute documentary with scenes of a house being washed away by surging water -- a timely visual given Superstorm Sandy's recent rampage along the East Coast. The film opened Nov. 9 in New York City and is rolling out to  select U.S. theaters  this month.
Balog, once a skeptic of global warming, was surprised by what he and his crew found. "In the first few months, we were seeing tremendously mind-boggling change in some of the cameras," he says. "Then as a few years went on, we all started to get the feeling of, God, this is such a powerful piece of history. We've got monumental change happening in front of our eyes."
He says he wrestled a long time over how to film climate change. "My brain kept coming back to ice," he says, recalling how he settled on the idea of time-lapse photography after an assignment in the Arctic for National Geographic.
In 2007, he launched the Extreme Ice Survey and began putting cameras -- initially set to shoot every hour and, later, every half-hour or 20 minutes -- in Alaska, Montana, Greenland and Iceland. His crew battled 150 mph winds, up to 20 feet of snow and subzero temperatures.
"We had temperatures down to minus-35 on a dogsled trip in Greenland in the wintertime. The frost bit my fingers and my nose," he says. "We had cameras destroyed by falling rocks coming off cliff faces." Other equipment was ruined by snow, foxes and ravens.
At one point, Balog broke down in tears when he realized a camera wasn't working and the project may have lost months of filming. In another scene of Chasing Ice, witnessed by film director Jeff Orlowski, who joined the expeditions, the edge of Greenland's Ilulissat glacier -- also known by its Danish name, Jakobshavn -- breaks off and falls into the sea below in a thunderous crash.
Scientists have used satellites  to document a related development: sea ice levels in the Arctic and the Antarctic. In September, the University of Colorado's National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC) reported that Arctic sea ice had fallen to its lowest level since measurements began in 1979, attributing the loss partly to climate change. It reported a slight increase in Antarctic sea ice but said that was a result of increased wind.
The loss of Arctic sea ice, which can reflect the sun's heat and  mitigate  warming, could contribute to glaciers melting, but the extent has not been quantified, says Julienne Stroeve, an NSIDC scientist.
Patrick Michaels, director of the Center for the Study of Science at the libertarian Cato Institute, says people shouldn't panic about  Arctic sea ice. He says history suggests that the Arctic has lost all its summer sea ice before, but its ecosystems adapted.
"The polar bears clearly survived," says Michaels, who describes himself as "lukewarm" on climate change.
Stroeve says that may be the case, but natural climate variability was likely the cause in the past, while human-induced climate change accounts for about half of the sea ice lost in the Arctic in recent decades.
Balog says Chasing Ice, which won the cinematography award at this year's Sundance Film Festival, and his Extreme Ice Survey provide irrefutable proof of climate change.
"Now the project seems destined to go on forever," he says, citing plans to expand it to the Andes in South America. "There's tremendous change happening  there, too, and we need to get some coverage on it."



Sandy revives debate over rising sea level; Scientists warn every inch plays a role in storms



Echoes of Superstorm Sandy remain from Manhattan's once-flooded streets to Maryland's battered boardwalks to New Jersey's washed-away beaches.
No surprise. The Eastern Seaboard -- or any coastal region -- occasionally finds itself in the cross hairs of ferocious ocean storms. But it may have taken Sandy to drive home the  threat  scientists have been warning about for years: a rise in the sea level.
More of the same could lie ahead, suggest ocean scientists such as U.S. Geological Survey oceanographer Asbury Sallenger. The storm triggered the expected arguments about global warming's role, but that debate aside, the new constant for any storm is the increasingly important role likely to be played by sea level.  In a study out Tuesday, climate scientists led by Stefan Rahmstorf of Germany's Potsdam Institute report that  since 1993 sea level has  risen worldwide at a rate 60% higher than predictions. The findings appear in the Environmental Research Letters journal.
"Sea-level rise is accelerating along the East Coast," Sallenger says. "Every inch adds to the kind of inundation we saw in Sandy."
The real question, Sallenger and other ocean experts say, is what effect rising sea levels, which are accelerating along a "hotspot" stretching from Cape Hatteras, N.C., to Maine, will have on storms hitting these places.
In June, Sallenger and colleagues reported in the journal Nature Climate Change that sea-level rise along the U.S. Atlantic Coast has been climbing at a rate three to four times higher than the global average since 1950. At  1.5 inches per decade now, it doesn't sound like a lot. But each inch counts, and New York Harbor's water  is 11 to 16 inches higher than it was a century ago, Sallenger says.
The accelerating sea-level rise springs partly from "subsidence," where groundwater withdrawals to sate thirsty towns and farms along the coast cause the ground to sink, and partly from warming waters in the North Atlantic, the study suggests. Warmer water simply takes up more space than cold water.
Not to be forgotten is that teetering infrastructure poses as much of a problem as global warming, says Alan Weisman, author of The World Without Us. "This is just one storm. People shouldn't lose sight of the fact that cities around the world have been flooding," Weisman says, referring to inundations in Manila, Bangkok and New York over just the past two years. "The politicization of this reality has been disconcerting, and I hope it stops, but I'm not hopeful."
Most climate scientists would see Superstorm Sandy as a largely natural event, not something born  of global warming, says Texas Tech climate researcher Katharine Hayhoe. But she acknowledges that the storm, sea-level rise and climate change are hard to disentangle.
A water level that's a few inches higher pales in comparison with a 14-foot storm surge in Lower Manhattan, but those few inches meant the surge was higher than it might have been otherwise.
Warmer ocean temperatures could have provided up to 20% greater power for the storm, so climate change's role isn't necessarily an either-or question, Hayhoe says.
"It is exactly two sides of the coin, and I think we'd both see the same two sides," she says.
"While we do expect increased hurricane damage in the U.S. as the climate warms, Sandy is not a pure example of a hurricane," says MIT hurricane expert Kerry Emanuel. It was a hybrid event that started as a tropical storm, grew into a hurricane, and morphed into an intense nor'easter. He says climate science doesn't have enough data to say whether these hybrid storms like Sandy will become more or less frequent.
It also doesn't matter, Emanuel writes in the current Foreign Policy magazine, because the real problem is sea-level rise.
The 2007 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change estimated that warming alone  would raise sea levels worldwide by almost 2 feet  the next century.  Add in  melting glaciers in Greenland and elsewhere, and sea level could rise more than 3 feet by then, NASA climate scientist James Hansen and Stanford's Ken Caldeira reported at last year's American Geophysical Union meeting.
While the "hotspot" study suggests  worsening will continue, Sallenger knows  other researchers take  a more "wait-and-see" attitude.
"Geologic records show that sea-level rise happens in big spurts, stops and starts," he  says.
"We have to rethink these flood heights to be more like 'Every year your chance of flooding is 1%,' rather than thinking it won't happen for  100 years," says urban flooding expert Jeroen Aerts of Vrije University in Amsterdam. "I'm from Amsterdam, and I walk around New York seeing all this land exposed without a seawall, and I'm just shocked."
At the same time, dikes, or seawalls, are an unlikely remedy for the entire East Coast, says civil engineer Robert Traver of Villanova University. Of the 25 most-densely populated counties nationwide, 23 are coastal ones.  "We can't build barriers around everything," Traver says.
---
THE RISING SEA
How fast sea is rising: 1.5 inches per decade
For New York Harbor, that means: 11 to 16 inches higher now than a century ago
How much higher seas might rise: 2 to 3 feet within the next century
Sources Nature Climate Change, 2007 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, NASA's James Hansen and Stanford's Ken Caldeira 



EPA chief Jackson steps down after 4 years; She angered industry with emissions rules



Environmental Protection Agency chief Lisa Jackson said  Thursday that she's stepping down after a four-year tenure marked by her agency's first greenhouse gas regulations and repeated battles with industry groups and GOP lawmakers.
Jackson, the first African American to serve as EPA administrator, came into office with bold plans to address climate change but accomplished only part of her agenda, foiled by opposition on Capitol Hill and occasionally the White House.
She often faced harsh congressional grilling. Last year, the GOP chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, Michigan Rep. Fred Upton, said she would need her own parking spot at the Capitol because he planned to summon her often for questioning.
Jackson, 50, a chemical engineer by training and a mom of two teens, offered no reason for her resignation other than saying she's ready for "new challenges, time with my family and new opportunities to make a difference." She said she was leaving the EPA "confident the ship is sailing in the right direction."
Her departure, set to occur after President Obama's  State of the Union address in January, comes amid other turnover that's common between presidential terms. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton is leaving, as is Jane Lubchenco, the head of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Others, including Energy Secretary Steven Chu, are likely to follow.
"It's unusual for administrators to stay for more than one term. These jobs are grueling, non-stop," said David Goldston, director of government affairs at the Natural Resources Defense Council.
"She's been an outspoken fighter for environmental protection," he said, noting the EPA's signature finding that carbon dioxide and five other gases that contribute to climate change qualify as pollutants under the Clean Air Act.
That "endangerment finding," which has withstood the industry's court challenges, enabled the EPA to set new emission standards for cars and light trucks. The standards require new models to nearly double  miles per gallon by 2025. In March, the EPA proposed emissions limits for new power plants, making it difficult to build coal-fired ones.
Under Jackson's tenure, the EPA set the first standards for emitting mercury, arsenic and other toxins from power plants; this month, it finalized tougher limits for emitting fine-particle soot from smokestacks, wood-burning stoves and diesel vehicles.
These rules won plaudits from environmentalists but rarely from industry. Howard Feldman of the American Petroleum Institute, which represents the oil industry, said the soot standard could harm the U.S. economic recovery. "We fear this new rule may be just the beginning of a 'regulatory cliff,'" he said.
House Republicans, including Rep. Darrell Issa, R-Calif., have tried to thwart or delay the EPA rules, arguing they'll increase unemployment, but the Senate has not gone along.
President Obama praised Jackson in a statement Thursday, saying she has shown "an unwavering commitment to the health of our families and our children."
Jackson also had setbacks. She pushed for a cap-and-trade bill to cap greenhouse gas emissions but allow companies to buy pollution credits from those under the limits. The bill passed the Democratic-led House in 2009 but died in the Senate. The EPA's limits on industrial pollution crossing state lines were struck down by a federal court.
The White House delayed or weakened some of Jackson's other proposals, including a new standard for ozone pollution that she sought in summer 2011 but that Obama put off until his second term. The EPA's final standard on emissions from industrial boilers and cement factories, announced last Friday, was weaker than the originally proposed version.
Her efforts riled industry. "The onslaught of regulations from the EPA means manufacturers will continue to see rising energy prices and skyrocketing compliance costs, which translate into few opportunities for growth and even fewer jobs," Jay Timmons, president of the National Association of Manufacturers, said in a statement last week.
This month, at the prodding of congressional Republicans, the EPA's inspector general said he was opening an inquiry into Jackson's use of a secondary e-mail account for official business. She said she had the account -- named "Richard Windsor" after the name of her dog and her former home in Windsor Township, N.J. -- because her public e-mail address was well known.
Jackson, a native of New Orleans who spent much of her career as a staff scientist at the EPA before heading New Jersey's Department of Environmental Protection from 2006 to 2008, earned engineering degrees from Tulane and Princeton Universities. The New York Times and The Washington Post report she may be a candidate for president of Princeton. 


