Tough talk, but 'no way to deliver'


Megan McCardle, The Daily Beast: "The speech does seem to be promising more on gay marriage and climate change, but whatever he is promising, he has no way to deliver. Climate change is  not going anywhere. Marriage is largely a state matter, and while there are federal initiatives he might push (like making gay couples eligible for social security, or various tax credits)  I am extremely skeptical that President Obama could or would push them through the legislature.  If inaugural addresses tell you anything about the presidency that follows, here's what this speech predicts: an administration in which Obama pleases his base by talking tougher to the GOP, without delivering any of the changes that his tough talk suggests."
James Fallows, The Atlantic: "Four years ago, when people were expecting a barn-burner, the newly inaugurated  Obama gave a deliberately downbeat, sober-toned presentation about the long challenges ahead. Now -- well, it's almost as if (the president)  knows he will never have to run again and hears the clock ticking on his last chance to use the power of the presidency on the causes he cares about. If anyone was wondering whether Obama wanted to lower expectations for his second term  no, he apparently does not."
Stacy Kaper and Rebecca Kaplan, National Journal: "The irony is that Obama spent more time talking about issues he will have a hard time moving the needle on than the issues sitting on his near-term agenda. Among them, several more rounds of fiscal battles that threaten to crowd out Obama's second-term agenda won only passing reference.  One word that could dominate the first 100 days of Obama's second term was not even mentioned once: debt."
Jonathan Tobin, Commentary: "The main takeaway from this speech is that the president isn't prepared to give an inch on his desire for more spending and taxing or to contemplate the reform of Medicare and Social Security that would allow those programs to endure.  A re-elected Obama is determined to take this country to the left with a big-government liberal agenda and will not consider any alternative. Elections do have consequences, but no one should think this will or should be accepted by Republicans."
Ken Walsh, U.S. News and World Report: "There were signs that the excitement and energy that Obama inspired four years ago have substantially diminished. Authorities estimated that there were fewer than 1 million people at the ceremony compared with 1.8 million in January 2009, when Obama was still a fresh face who inspired hope and raised the possibility of change. But over the past four years, he has run into the realities of partisanship and stalemate in Washington, and much of his agenda has been stymied." 



Report: Climate change a threat to wildlife



From birds in the Plains to bighorn sheep in California,  a new study says animals are struggling to adapt to the warming atmosphere  caused by the burning of fossil fuels.
"Climate change is the biggest threat wildlife will face this century," says the report out today from  the National Wildlife Federation in Reston, Va.
Animals have adapted to  climate variation since the beginning of time, but the report says  changes now happen  much faster than they can  respond.
Federation climate scientist Amanda Staudt  says that many animal and plant species are shifting their ranges to colder locales and that these shifts are taking place two to three times faster than  anticipated.
"We are certainly beginning to see the effects of climate change on wildlife," agrees Mark Shaffer,  climate change policy director for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. "We're expecting more effects in the future." 



Surging cost of benefits threatens Obama's big vision


President Obama is thinking big thoughts. Climate change, gun control, immigration reform, energy independence and investing in a "rising, thriving middle class" were among the issues he touched on during Tuesday night's State of the Union Address.
Never mind that many of his big thoughts will face long odds in a divided and small-minded Congress.  Stung by Republicans' refusal to meet him halfway on most issues, but also emboldened by his re-election, Obama is playing a long game. His goal is to sell a vision of what he stands for, and how he would like to govern, rather than of what he expects to enact in the near term.
In many ways, his list is appealing and audacious. Climate change is arguably the biggest long-term threat the world faces, yet has been so politically toxic that Obama barely mentioned it until his inaugural last month. Gun violence is a blight on America. Immigration reform is a mainstream idea, championed equally by Obama and former president George W. Bush, that was hijacked by hard-liners.
But if those problems are to be solved, the most important element of his speech might have been a challenge to his fellow Democrats: "Those of us who care deeply about programs like Medicare must embrace the need for modest reforms -- otherwise, our retirement programs will crowd out the investments we need for our children and jeopardize the promise of a secure retirement for future generations."
Obama has hardly been a champion of either deficit reduction or entitlement reforms. And his party has increasingly begun to dig in its heels on these matters. So for him to embrace the cause of reforming Medicare -- even timidly through means-testing and having the government pay for health care results, not costs incurred -- is encouraging, if insufficient.
Reforms to entitlements should be part of any discussion of public policy. But they particularly need to be part of the discussion in liberal circles. These programs were created largely by Democrats, something they can take pride in. But as they get bigger and costlier, they are suffocating the progressive agenda.
This is most apparent in financial terms.  The Office of Management and Budget projects that entitlements will cost a staggering $10trillion over the next five years and will account for more than 60 cents of every dollar government spends. As these programs grow faster than  tax receipts, their capacity to crowd out investments will only grow.
But the smothering impact of entitlements also has a philosophical dimension. An ideology that purports to be about initiating positive change has become -- through its absolutist defense of entitlements -- a defender of the status quo. What's more, that status quo is hardly one that would live up to the egalitarian ideals espoused by progressives. Medicare, for instance, borrows heavily from today's young and middle-age workers, many of whom struggle to make ends meet and lack health insurance, to subsidize health care for seniors, many of whom could afford to pay considerably more.
Obama is the right person to bring this message to liberals, who've begun acting as if deficits are under control. Restraining the runaway spending on entitlements is not only important to fiscal conservatives, economists and bond holders. It is essential if the USA is to claim the future that the president described Tuesday night. 



Does climate change debate carry religious command?



On Tuesday,  President Obama once again brought up climate change in his State of the Union Address, just as he did in his inaugural address last month. This week, he spoke in the cold voice of science, but in that first address the president took a different approach, one in which the seeds of a broader environmental coalition can be found.
On his second inauguration, Obama said the U.S. must reduce its greenhouse gas emissions in order to  "preserve our planet, commanded to our care by God. That's what will lend meaning to the creed our fathers once declared."
Climate activists have argued that science, not God, requires urgent greenhouse gas reductions. Now, as a Slate headline put it, "Obama Brings God Into the Climate Change  Fight."
Some environmentalists speculated that Obama might be hoping to reach out to devout Christians -- many of them Republicans -- in the hope of building a wider consensus.
Role of Christianity
This is a long way from the 1967 declaration of American historian Lynn White, in Science magazine, that Christianity bears primary responsibility for raping the earth. Indeed, Obama's inaugural remarks appear to have been an allusion to the book of Genesis, which tells us that God gave the world to human beings for their sustenance and enjoyment, but requires us to be good stewards of his creation.
The president also might have been acknowledging the fact that among the political problems of our time, climate change could be the most "wicked" of all. Voters are being asked  to bear large burdens now in order to create practical benefits that might not be realized until many of them are dead. If the case for climate change is not deeply moral, capable of invoking powerful altruistic motives, it will be politically hopeless.
Many of Obama's environmental supporters admittedly have in mind a different message of the Christian God. If human beings alter the climate radically, they will be "playing God," challenging God's authority over his own creation. In the Old Testament, we learn that those who challenge God's authority will surely be punished, typically with flood, famine, pestilence, drought, earthquake or other environmental calamity.
Today, new prophets  tell us  that our modern  sins will lead to rising seas, stronger hurricanes  and longer droughts. If we don't reform our sinful ways,  global catastrophe on a biblical scale looms. Billy Graham could hardly have said it better.
Hearing God's call
In traditional Christian theology, there are two direct ways to access the thinking of God: the "Book of the Bible" and the "Book of Nature."
Until Charles Darwin, Christians believed that the earth was not much changed from its creation about 6,000 years ago, meaning the design of the natural world  offered a glimpse into the mind of God. John Calvin would thus write that God "daily discloses himself in the whole workmanship of the universe."  The plant and animal kingdoms are "burning lamps" that "shine for us  the glory of its author."  To eliminate a species or damage the earth is to limit our  knowledge of God.
In some ways, environmentalism should be seen as a secularized version of Calvinism, minus God.  Obama has  brought God back into the environmental conversation, even if his theological knowledge is incomplete.
Robert H. Nelson is a professor of environmental policy at the University of Maryland and author of The New Holy Wars: Economic Religion versus Environmental Religion in Contemporary America. 



More costly to address climate change or ignore it? Your Say


In the State of the Union speech this week, President Obama challenged Congress to address climate change by passing legislation to reduce greenhouse gases.
PRICE OF DENIAL
Denying climate change will mean more taxes on the American people. Do you think that recovering from drought, more severe storms and hurricanes is free?
The longer the problem is ignored, the more expensive it will be to address later.
Climate change does not "cause" a particular storm, but it affects the probability of storms occurring and the intensity of such storms.
Tom Kane
How can man change the climate? There is  a natural order to the world. Drought, storms and hurricanes have been around longer than mankind. The cost of recovering from them is disaster relief.
Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Katrina were prime examples of man being too stupid to understand that you shouldn't live in an area below sea level, essentially a  bowl, or build houses on barrier islands.
Bob Olson
MONEY GRAB
The issue is not about whether climate change is real or imagined; it's more about how much man has done or can do to affect that change, be it for better or worse.
Naturally occurring things such as volcanoes and livestock also pump  greenhouse gases into the atmosphere.
Basically, I couldn't care less what is done to alter climate change because whatever is done will have so little effect as to be pointless. The only thing that concerns me is the government stepping in and using the opportunity to raise tax revenues under the guise of environmental protection, for example, carbon credits.
The government's role in this should be to set limits and guidelines. Anything else is just more pilferage from pockets that are getting shallower by the day.
Paul Hafner
Maybe people  don't like the idea of taxing polluting activities because  they haven't considered it as a market-based solution.
Polluting activities should be made less economically viable while cleaner alternatives should be subsidized.
If we don't do it, we shove the hidden costs off for future generations to pay.
The biosphere's habitability is not a limitless resource for us to plunder.
Phillip Noe
Will the next generation have to solve the national debt issue and global warming? Neither one is solvable. Not at this point.
And the debt is going to kill them off much much sooner than climate change.
Don Scotter
PROBLEM WITHOUT SOLUTION
You can do all you want here in the United States of America, but you're not going to change China and Third World countries.
William Antle
Climate change is occurring all the time with or with out humans on the planet.
Andrey Andre'y
Regardless of whether you believe it, the 30 billion metric tons of carbon dioxide emissions per year will somehow have an effect.  That is common sense.
Steven Estes 



Addressing pollution is a global issue: #tellusatoday


WeaskedonTwitter for suggestions
to reduce pollution and
curb climate change.
TWITTER
@USATOPINION
Hold every nation to the pollution
standards that U.S. manufacturers
are held to. This is not just an
Americanissue.
@john_lipscomb
Stop selling bottled water. The industry
isabigcontributortopollution
(manufacturing, distributing
andpackaging).
@roylee1
Havethegovernmentinstall solar
oneverybuildinginAmerica.
@jazzyjess707
Why can't we agree that helping
the environment is a good thing
and not worry about whether climatechangeishappeningornot.
@carlascognition
Promote healthy eating by pushing
for a nationwide Meatless
Monday resolution. According to
the United Nations,meatproduction
is a main contributor to
greenhousegasses.
@HMOORE123
To join in ournext discussion, follow
@USATOpinion or search
#tellusatoday onTwitter. 



Thousands demand action on climate change



In what was billed as the largest climate rally in U.S. history, thousands of people marched past the White House on Sunday to urge President Obama to reject a controversial pipeline and take other steps to fight climate change.
Organizers, including the Sierra Club, estimated that more than 35,000 people from  30-plus states -- some dressed as polar bears -- endured frigid weather to join the "Forward on Climate" rally, though crowd size could not be confirmed. Their immediate target is Obama's  decision, expected soon, on the Keystone XL  pipeline that would carry tar sands oil from Canada through several Great Plains states to Texas.
Bill McKibben, founder of the environmental  group 350.org,  described the 1,000-plus-mile pipeline as "one of the largest carbon bombs in history." Some climate scientists say the production of tar sands oil emits more greenhouse gases than conventional crude oil. Supporters, including the oil industry, say it would reduce U.S. dependence on unstable foreign sources of oil.
Marchers' signs read, "Read my lips: no new carbons," and "We're in a climate hole: stop digging." Another  said, "Don't be frackin' crazy."
Michael Ware of Burlington, Vt.,  said  extreme weather has convinced many Americans that climate change is serious: "What will Vermont   any state  look like in 20 years?"
Obama has pledged repeatedly to tackle climate change.  Protesters said they are holding him to his word. They  also want him to  limit  carbon pollution from both new and existing power plants. Last year, the EPA proposed limits only on new plants.
Obama rejected the initial 1,700-mile Keystone XL pipeline, saying more time was needed for environmental review.
Developer  TransCanada  got approval last year from the Army Corps of Engineers to begin construction of the 485-mile, $2.3 billion southern leg of the project from Cushing, Okla., to the Gulf Coast. Obama's pending decision involves the 1,179-mile, $5.3 billion northern leg, from Alberta to Steele City, Neb. Nebraska Gov. Dave Heineman, a Republican,  has approved a route through his state. 



Stop the foot-dragging and build the Keystone pipeline


Many controversial issues lend themselves to split-the-difference compromises, but the Keystone XL pipeline isn't one of them. That puts President Obama in a tough spot as his administration nears a decision on the proposed $7 billion project,  which would carry tar-sand oil from Canada to Gulf Coast refineries.
For the environmentalists who strongly supported Obama's re-election, Keystone has become a crucial test of his promises to take climate change seriously. Thousands demonstrated in Washington on Sunday against the project, asserting that  the pipeline would unlock so much dirty oil  that it would be "game over" for the globe if the project proceeds.
For Canada, whose government badly wants the pipeline to go forward, the decision is an equally crucial test of the two neighbors' relationship. And for the United States, the project offers a rare opportunity to create jobs and lessen the nation's decades-long dependence on oil from unstable or unfriendly suppliers.
Both sides make strong arguments,  but after more than four years of exhaustive study, the right answer on Keystone remains: Build it.
At a time of rising global competition for energy resources, the pipeline would bring reliable new oil supplies to a U.S. that still imports 40% of its crude, 7.6 million barrels a day last year. And 40% of those imports come from OPEC nations  such as Venezuela, Iraq and Nigeria. Keystone is expected to supply 830,000 million barrels a day, a key step toward the long-sought goal of North American energy independence, which suddenly seems attainable.
Much of the opposition to Keystone has come from critics who say running a big pipeline through the heart of the USA is  too risky. Haven't they noticed that tens of thousands of miles of oil pipelines already crisscross the United States? As long as the nation's quarter-billion vehicles rely almost exclusively on gasoline and diesel, pipelines are the safest and most efficient way to move it.
Obama delayed a final decision on Keystone last year, in part to allow a rerouting around environmentally sensitive areas in Nebraska. That has been accomplished, and Nebraska's governor signed off on the new map last month.
Nor would blocking Keystone keep the tar-sands oil in the ground. In a world starving for oil, it's overwhelmingly likely the oil would find another way to market -- through a pipeline to West Coast ports to carry it to China, to East Coast ports to carry it to other nations, or by barge, rail and existing pipelines into the USA.
The goal of locking down tar-sands oil and stopping other forms of fossil fuel  production such as fracking -- as many protesters demanded in Sunday's demonstration -- would be more compelling if the U.S. were ready to shift to renewable fuels such as solar, wind and biomass to power vehicles, heat homes and run factories. Last year, though, renewables supplied just 9.4% of all U.S. energy needs,  despite  robust tax incentives for wind power and electric cars. Shutting down conventional sources of energy at this point is  naive and economically destructive.
Demand might be further reduced by making  vehicles and buildings  more efficient.  A carbon tax or a cap-and-trade system could do the same by making the price of conventional fuels better reflect their cost to the environment.
Until that day, though, the best choice for the  economy and the planet is to ensure ample, secure supplies of energy.  The Keystone pipeline is an essential part of that  strategy. 



Warmer winters bedevil moose; Minn. experts hunt cause of species' decline, from disease, climate squeeze, even pesky ticks



Minnesota's decision last month  to end its moose-hunting season because of the animal's rapidly declining numbers in the state has made the gangly, iconic symbol of cold northlands a new player in the debate over climate change.
Some scientists attribute the threats to climate change; others say more study is needed. Doug Inkley, a senior scientist at the National Wildlife Federation, says moose are "the canary in the coal mine. As a large-bodied animal that needs cool temperatures, it is particularly susceptible to climate change."
While the polar bear's problems are well-publicized,  he says, "moose are in our backyards. This is a very unfortunate and prominent declaration that climate change is in our backyards."
The most stressed moose population now appears to be in Minnesota, where it has fallen from 8,840 to 2,760 in seven years, a drop of 69%, including a drop of 35% in the past year alone. In response, the state closed the fall hunting season and embarked on a high-tech study of what is killing the moose.
"It is survival of the fittest, and   moose are ending up on the wrong end of the stick," says Gary Botzek, executive director of the Minnesota Conservation Federation.
He suspects that milder winters in recent years are raising the survival rates of bloodsucking ticks that attack moose by the tens of thousands and that warmer-than-normal summers have further stressed the animals.
The drop in the moose population was a "much steeper decline than we had seen in the past," says Lou Cornicelli, who is leading Minnesota's study. He says he's not sure what is causing the decline. The state put GPS collars on 100 moose last month to check whether ticks are the primary cause. Other factors could be a brain worm carried by deer or kills by a growing wolf population, he says.
The stress on moose depends on the latitude where they live. Moose populations are doing well in Alaska and Maine, where colder climates and vast, changing landscapes are moose heaven. Maine, in fact, is considering raising the number of moose-hunting licenses from 3,725 last year to 4,000 in 2013. Its population is estimated at 76,000.
Lee Kantar, Maine moose biologist, says the population has stayed healthy because it is farther north than other stressed populations and because Maine's logging industry creates an ideal environment for moose that depend on young trees and ever-evolving forests for food and shelter.
David James, an Alaska state moose specialist in the Fairbanks region, says the state's moose population -- estimated in the tens of thousands -- remains healthy.
In states on the southern end of moose range, warmer winters, dwindling habitat, disease and predators are all being studied as possible reasons for falling moose populations.
"The answers are a lot more complicated than people want them to be," says Russ Mason of the Michigan Department of Natural Resources. Mason says a commission is likely to recommend against holding the state's first modern moose hunting season this year because the population -- an estimated 451 moose in the Upper Peninsula -- is barely stable.
Montana is counting its moose population and studying what is killing them. "We still have a relatively healthy population but not as healthy as it was," says Ron Aasheim of the State Department of Fish, Wildlife and Parks.
New Hampshire, where ticks are a problem, has cut its hunting licenses from 408 last year to 281 for 2013. The moose population has dwindled from an estimated 7,000 in 1996 to about 4,500 today.
Kristine Rines of  the New Hampshire Fish and Game Department, says the state has had shorter winters, which the ticks exploit.
Rines says biologists have found as many as 120,000 ticks on a single moose. The insects not only cause anemia but force moose to rub, reducing their  coats and making them susceptible to hypothermia.
Botzek says Minnesotans worry about losing an animal that has long symbolized the state's outdoors.
"Moose are pretty important animals to our psyche here in Minnesota," he says. "We lose moose, I don't think we are getting them back." 



Why you should sweat climate change; More asthma, heat strokes and flooding (and that's just the warm-up act)



More American children are getting asthma and allergies, and more seniors are suffering heat strokes.
Food and utility prices are rising. Flooding is overrunning bridges, swamping subways and closing airport runways.
People are losing jobs in drought-related factory closings. Cataclysmic storms are wiping out sprawling neighborhoods. Towns are sinking.
This isn't a science-fiction, end-of-the-world scenario. Though more anecdotal than normal -- today, at least -- these scenes are already playing out somewhere in the United States, and they're expected to get worse in the years ahead. In fact, a remaking of America is likely in our lifetimes -- a flicker in geological time. This will transform how and where we live, work and play.
Massachusetts' climate will start to look more like North Carolina's, and Illinois will begin to feel like Texas. Montana's Glacier National Park, a glorious site that draws tourists from around the world, will likely lose its glaciers.
Climate change is partly the culprit. Scientific research shows that it's increasing the risk and intensity of heat waves, downpours, drought and wildfires. A key factor: the burning of fossil fuels. With these changes come rising sea levels and acidified oceans. So when Superstorm Sandy struck New York harbor in October, the flooding that killed scores of people, ruined thousands of homes and closed subways as well as airports came amid already rising seas.
As the planet edges this year toward what some scientists say will be the highest concentration of heat-trapping carbon dioxide emissions in at least 800,000 years,  reporters will travel the country to explore places where climate change is already affecting lives.
Not all of it is bad news. As with any change, there will be winners and losers, especially at the local level. There will be longer growing seasons, lower heating bills and fewer cold-related deaths. Melting Arctic sea ice is opening the Northwest Passage off Alaska's coast  to tourism, maritime shipping and oil exploration.
Yet on a national level, the losers will probably outnumber the winners, according to a draft report of the third National Climate Assessment released by the U.S. government in January.
Americans can adapt to some climate change, and indeed already are, but a continuing rise in global carbon emissions will make adapting increasingly costly and difficult -- especially in developed coastal areas.
Some potential impacts, such as higher flood-insurance premiums for luxury waterfront homes or more bald spots on ski slopes, might seem trivial. Others -- lower home values on the coasts, heat-related deaths in the Midwest or the relocation of entire villages in Alaska -- not so much.
The effects of this new world are reverberating from coast to coast:
"Who's going to hire me now?" asks Barbara Roberts, 56, who lost her job of 36 years a month ago on Feb. 1 when a Cargill beef-processing plant in Plainview, Texas, closed. The facility, which employed 2,000 people, was starved of cattle because of the drought. Roberts, who earned $13.70 an hour plus benefits, says she hurt her back after 20 years on the production line, leaving her unable to lift heavy items. The only other large, decent-paying employer in town, she says, is Walmart.
"My house isn't straight anymore. It's tilted," says Jeff Miskill, a contractor in Norfolk, Va., where rising sea levels have contributed to repeated flooding throughout the city and a shifting of the ground under his home.
"You can feel it inside. You feel like you're walking uphill." Miskill says neighbors aren't worried about the semantics of what's happening, whether climate change or flooding. "Call it what you will," he says, "but we have a water problem."
"My windows and doors are rotted away," says Stanley Tom, 52, the tribal administrator of Newtok, Alaska, a place where severe flooding is always a risk. The area's infrastructure was built on permafrost -- soil saturated with frozen water -- that because of higher temperatures is now melting into mud. Roads and runways have been ruined, and water supplies are contaminated.
All of Newtok's 350 or so residents are being relocated from the eroding coastline to higher ground because, as Tom says, "the village is sinking."
Inside 'the mixed bag'
Scores of politicians and millions of Americans are skeptics. After all, no single storm, heat wave or wildfire -- unlike longer-term patterns -- can be linked directly to climate change. These esteemed scientists don't have all the answers, particularly as their projections stretch far into the future. Although almost all agree on the broad contours of human-induced climate change, they continue to refine the details as new data and better tracking technology -- such as a series of NASA satellites launched in 2000 -- become available.
"It's a mixed bag," says Kerry Emanuel, a climate scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, about the link between extreme weather and climate change. Though Emanuel once doubted the evidence, he now says the world is clearly warming beyond its natural variability.
Emanuel, author of What We Know About Climate Change, says rainfall may have the clearest climate link. He says it now occurs less often, but when it does rain, downpours are more likely. So wet regions will be wetter, causing flash flooding. Dry ones will get drier, resulting in drought. Heat, of course, is another consequence. So a heat wave that used to occur once every 100 years now happens every five years.
An indicator of that warming is the rising concentration of carbon-dioxide emissions in the atmosphere -- now at 396 parts per million, according to January data by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. It was about 275 parts per million two centuries ago, and research by British Antarctic Survey's Eric Wolff suggests that it probably hasn't exceeded 400 ppm -- likely within the next few years worldwide -- in at least 800,000 years. Leading climate scientists, including NASA's James Hansen, warn that concentrations above 350 ppm risk planetary perils, including melting ice sheets and rapidly spreading drought.
The most recent decade was the nation's hottest on record, and 2012 was the hottest single year. The average U.S. temperature has risen 1.5 degrees Fahrenheit since reliable record-keeping began in 1895 -- 80% of that has occurred since 1980. The increase might seem small, but scientists warn that a ripple effect can trigger "tipping points," beyond which the planet may not be able to recover.
For example, the warmer the air, the more summer Arctic sea ice is lost. The more sea ice that's lost, the more warming occurs because ice reflects sunlight while water absorbs it. As the atmosphere warms, it holds larger amounts of water vapor, which could help energize everything from hurricanes to snowstorms. And the cycle continues.
Average U.S. temperatures will likely rise at least another 2 degrees to 4 degrees in most places in the next few decades and between 3 to 10 degrees by 2100, depending on the amount of oil, gas and coal we burn, according to the draft of the 2013 National Climate Assessment. The report, written by 240 private and government scientists, is based on hundreds of studies published in science journals.
Higher temperatures mean higher sea levels, too. The reason's simple: As water warms, it expands. While global sea level has risen 8 inches since 1900 and is projected to rise another 1 to 4 feet by 2100, the problem is worse along the U.S. Atlantic Coast  because of differences in ocean currents, salinity, water temperatures and land movements.
The economic costs of all these changes are enormous -- not only for those directly affected but also for the nation's taxpayers, who are stuck with the bills for disaster relief, national flood insurance and drought-related crop losses. In February, for the first time, the non-partisan General Accountability Office said climate change puts the U.S. government at "high risk "of financial exposure. NOAA says 11 extreme weather and climate events last year alone in the United States cost more than $1 billion each.
At the heart of it: Water
For Jimmy Strickland, climate issues aren't theoretical. They're business. He owns an accounting firm with a one-story brick office building two blocks from Norfolk's waterfront. During his 35 years in the Hague section of town, three huge storms have struck -- all in the past decade. Each time, his building flooded and had to be closed at least two months for repairs that cost his insurance company about $250,000.
"You lose time, and time is money," Strickland says.
While Norfolk is second only to New Orleans for sea-level rise, partly because its land is naturally sinking, other coastal U.S. cities -- Boston; Charleston, S.C.; Miami; New York; Seattle; San Francisco; Tampa -- are vulnerable, too.
"It's a harbinger of things to come," says Leonard Berry, a geoscience professor at Florida Atlantic University, of the regular high-tide flooding on Miami's streets. The Army Corps of Engineers expects that South Florida's sea level will rise 3 to 7 inches by 2030; the range jumps from 9 to 24 inches by 2060.
While there's too much water in some places, there's not enough in others. Drought afflicted as much as 65% of the contiguous lower 48 states last year and still lingers in more than half of the country. Corn, wheat and soybean crops were decimated, prompting higher food prices. Nearly two dozen ethanol plants in 13 states halted production because they lacked a key ingredient: corn.
In Plainview, Texas, Cargill's plant closing took workers by surprise.
"They didn't tell us 'til that day," Roberts says. "It was 10:45 a.m. when the announcement came: 'Everyone off the floor.'" She says they went to the cafeteria for the news. "We didn't go back to the floor. We went home."
"The U.S. cattle herd is at its lowest level since 1952," Cargill Beef's president, John Keating, said in announcing the closure. He said the company held off "as long as possible," hoping the drought would break. "Unfortunately," he added, "the drought has not broken."
But heat alone is a hazard
Others have suffered from, if not drought, the heat itself.
"It's the silent killer," says Laurence Kalkstein, a University of Miami professor who studies the effect of heat on health. He says if climate change brings hotter -- but still variable -- weather, more heat-related deaths will likely occur.
Riley Kimble was found dead in a tiny, stifling apartment without air conditioning in Chicago last July on a day when outside temperatures reached 103. The city's medical examiner said heat stress contributed to his death and that of at least two dozen others. He was 59.
His stepdaughter, Nicole Hughes,  says he suffered from schizophrenia. As a young man, before his illness struck, she says, Kimble was a college student and avid reader who helped her with homework. He was the only dad she ever knew.
Ernestine Williams says she's struggling to "keep it together" since her daughter Mary, then 56, died in the same Chicago heat wave. She lives on a widow's pension but has taken in Mary's three young adult children, who she says took the death "real hard.  No one was prepared for that." 



As Arctic ice melts, full steam ahead for shipping



Who said global warming is all bad?
There will certainly be more negative than positive effects from climate change. But shipping routes across the Arctic Ocean -- which have been ice-covered and impassable since humans invented ships millenniums ago -- could be open  for the first time by midcentury because of climate change, a study suggests.
This includes shipping directly across the North Pole and through the famed Northwest Passage, a sea route from Newfoundland toward the Bering Strait, neither of which has ever been done. The study appears in Monday's edition of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Plus.
"Nobody's ever talked about shipping over the top of the North Pole," according to study lead author Laurence C. Smith, a geography professor at UCLA. "This is an entirely unexpected possibility."
The earliest that ships could travel over the North Pole or through the Northwest Passage would likely be in the 2040s or 2050s, Smith says. This sort of shipping would  occur only in late summer and early fall, he adds. The prime month would be September, when Arctic sea ice is at its annual minimum.
"The development is both exciting from an economic development point of view and worrisome in terms of safety, both for the Arctic environment and for the ships themselves," Smith says.
Going directly across the Arctic, or through the Northwest Passage, could lead to significant savings in time and money for shippers.
In the past couple of summers, a few dozen ships have traversed the Arctic through the Northern Sea Route. It is controlled by Russia, which charges  "a lot of money" to use it, Smith says. Ships that use the North Pole route, though, would  need to be special, ice-breaking ships because of random floating ice remaining on that route. Regular ships -- which make up about 99% of the world's fleet, Smith says -- might be able to use the Northwest Passage.
No part of the world has seen as much warming in recent decades as the Arctic. Since the 1980s, temperatures in the Arctic have risen faster than the global average.
Last September, sea ice  covered the least amount of area ever observed in the satellite record (1979-present), according to the annual Arctic Report Card of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
Most of the Arctic Ocean  is controlled by five countries -- the USA, Canada, Russia, Denmark and Norway -- all of whom have a coastline on the ocean. The center of it, however, including the North Pole, is in international waters.
Given this potential for new shipping routes in the Arctic, NOAA recently issued a plan for updated Arctic maps as part of a major effort to improve navigation for Arctic areas experiencing increasing vessel traffic as ice disappears.
"Ships need updated charts with precise and accurate measurements," said Capt. Doug Baird of NOAA's Coast Survey's marine chart division. "We don't have decades to get it done. Ice diminishment is here now." 



Climate change issues face Obama's EPA and Energy nominees



Reflecting his intent to tackle climate change in his second term, President Obama picked two Washington veterans who've been wrestling with such issues for years.
Obama announced the selection of the Environmental Protection Agency's clean air chief Gina McCarthy, 58, to head the agency and MIT professor Ernest Moniz, 68, to lead the Department of Energy  on Monday.  In making the long-expected picks, Obama said, "they're going to be making sure that we're investing in American energy, that we're doing everything that we can to combat the threat of climate change."
If confirmed by the Senate, they would take over agencies with missions that Obama raised to the top of his priority list in his recent inaugural address and State of the Union speech, calling for a doubling in energy efficiency and other steps to address global warming.
Both McCarthy, who headed the EPA's air-pollution efforts during Obama's first term, and Moniz, who was a top Energy official during President Clinton's second term, stand out as politically experienced pragmatists, policy analysts say.
"Both of these nominees are very consistent in pursuing practical means, not ideology, to reach their goals,"  said policy expert Dan Lashof of the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC), an environmental group.
McCarthy, who also worked for two former GOP governors including Mitt Romney when he led Massachusetts, is known for considering industry concerns during her successful push to nearly double gas-mileage standards for new cars and light trucks by 2025.
Moniz supports  nuclear power, natural gas as a "bridge fuel" to replace coal and burying carbon dioxide from power plants underground,  none of which are favorites with environmental groups.  His broad energy research embodies Obama's "all of the above" energy strategy.
Chief among  challenges awaiting McCarthy, who will replace her current boss Lisa Jackson, are calls by the NRDC and other  groups for tighter emission caps on existing coal-fired power plants, the leading U.S. source of greenhouse gases.
Such regulations give the industry pause. Jack Gerard, president of the American Petroleum Institute, a trade group, said Obama touts job creation as a top priority, but adds, "The problem is that EPA, in many cases, is not proposing regulations that meet this goal."
Other looming issues include  an Obama decision on whether to approve the northern leg of the Keystone XL pipeline. The billion-dollar private project would carry a heavy crude oil, known as tar sands oil, from Canada across the Great Plains to refineries in Illinois and Texas. On Friday, the State Department issued a draft review that riled environmentalists, who seek the pipeline's rejection, by saying Canada's tar sands will likely be developed whether the project is approved or not.
Environmental groups expect McCarthy will be on their side. The president  "has scored a slam dunk for the environment by picking Gina McCarthy," said Gene Karpinski of the League of Conservation Voters. 



Insurers not so hot on climate change; Report: Most unprepared for mounting claims



Most insurance companies do not have comprehensive strategies to cope with climate change despite mounting weather-related claims, says a report out  Thursday.
Of 184 companies surveyed, only 23 had such strategies, and 13 of those that did were foreign-owned, according to a report by Ceres, a Boston-based non-profit that promotes eco-minded business practices.
The report says the most prepared tend to be the largest companies, with scientists on staff, and those that insure property rather than life or health.
Many companies "won't talk about climate change" and if they do, they use "hedged" language to avoid the controversial issue of whether it's man-made, says author Sharlene Leurig, senior manager of Ceres' insurance program. She says the issue is less politically divisive in Europe, where insurers are often better prepared.
The report comes as weather-related disasters cost an estimated $100 billion in damages last year,  and the U.S. government's latest National Climate Assessment  says climate change increases the risks and severity of heat waves, downpours, droughts and wildfires as well as the intensity of hurricanes.
The report's findings are based on responses by insurers doing at least $300 million worth of business in California, New York and Washington -- states that mandate they participate in a survey to disclose their plans.
Ceres evaluated the companies for how seriously they study climate-related risks and take steps to reduce them, such as lowering their own and their clients' energy use and greenhouse gas emissions.
Others say the insurance industry is stepping up to the challenge. It's made 1,148 efforts to adapt and mitigate climate change, according to a study released in December by Evan Mills, a scientist at the federally funded Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.
He said insurers have introduced at least 130 energy-efficient products and services and paid claims encouraging their use in rebuilding after a loss.
Leurig says Mills looked at the largest global insurers, while her study evaluated both large and smaller companies working in the United States. Still, the industry says it's ready.
"They (insurers and re-insurers) have been dealing with climate variability and volatility in every corner of the globe for decades," says Robert Hartwig, president of the Insurance Information Institute, a trade group. "The industry globally has never been stronger, despite record catastrophic losses in recent years."
Hartwig says the industry had no trouble covering the 1.5 million claims worth an estimated $25 billion in damage from Superstorm Sandy last year.
He says smaller insurers are no less prepared, because they can access the scientific expertise of their brokers and re-insurers.
Washington Insurance Commissioner Mike Kreidler agrees the industry is now financially solid but says it can  do more to prepare.
He cites its efforts to boost auto safety by advocating seat belts and air bags.
He says it could do the same with climate change by encouraging people to build more-resilient structures in less-risky areas.
Kreidler says he worries that insurers will react to major losses by  boosting premiums, adding exclusions or pulling out of devastated areas, leaving communities without coverage or taxpayers with the tab.
He says climate change can be that kind of "game-changer." 



How climate change threatens the seas -- and yes, seafood; Oysters a 'canary in the coal mine' as acidification of oceans imperils our food chain



The tide rolls out on a chilly March evening, and the oystermen roll in, steel rakes in hand, hip boots crunching on the gravel beneath a starry, velvet sky.
As they prepare  to harvest some of the sweetest shellfish on the planet, a danger lurks beyond the shore that will eventually threaten clams, mussels, everything with a shell or that eats something with a shell. The entire food chain could be affected. That means fish, fishermen and, perhaps, you.
"Ocean acidification," the shifting of the ocean's water toward the acidic side of its chemical balance, has been driven by climate change and has brought  increasingly corrosive seawater to the surface along the West Coast and the inlets of Puget Sound, a center of the $111 million shellfish industry in the Pacific Northwest.
 traveled to the tendrils of Oyster Bay as the second stop in a year-long series to explore places where climate change is already affecting lives.
The acidification taking place here guarantees the same for the rest of the world's oceans in the years ahead.  This isn't the kind of acid that burns holes in chemist's shirt sleeves; ocean water is actually slightly alkaline. But since the start of the industrial revolution, the world's oceans have grown nearly 30% more acidic, according to a 2009 Scientific Committee on Oceanic Resources report. Why? Climate change, where heat-trapping carbon dioxide emitted into the air by burning coal, oil and other fossil fuels ends up as excess carbonic acid absorbed into the ocean.
That shift hurts creatures like oysters that build shells or fish that eat those creatures or folks like shellfish farmer Bill Dewey, who makes his living off the ocean.
"As fresh as they get, you could eat one now," says  Dewey of Taylor Shellfish Farms in Shelton, Wash., shucking an oyster open, mud running from its shell to reveal the opulent meat within, silver and white in the starlight. The black lip curling around the sweet-tasting shellfish reveals it to be a Pacific oyster, farmed worldwide.
"Folks think we just get rich picking oysters off the ground. A lot of work goes into every one of these, and we can't afford to lose any of them," Dewey says.
Lose them they have, and lose them they will, to the water lapping at Dewey's hip boots where the low tide meets the flats.
"We are looking into the future happening now," Dewey says.  And researchers are seeing similar corrosive effects on Florida's coral reefs that shelter young fish and on the tiny sea snails that feed salmon and other species in the Pacific Ocean.
TOO MUCH OF 'A GOOD THING'
Because of ocean chemistry, water three times more acidic resides at greater ocean depths. When conditions are right, strong winds blowing over ocean water along steep coasts, such as along the West Coast of North America, generate "upwelling" of these deep waters. The results bring this more corrosive seawater to the shallows of places such as Puget Sound, a foreshadowing today of how the oceans will look in a few decades.
"We are able to see the effects of ocean acidification," says oceanographer Richard Feely of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. He first charted upwelling of deeper, corrosive ocean water on the surface of the Pacific Ocean along the West Coast on a 2007 expedition.
How did it get there in the first place? Atmospheric carbon ends up absorbed directly by the ocean, where plankton sucks up carbon dioxide via photosynthesis. "That's a good thing," Feely says, because the carbon dioxide they ingest means less warming of the atmosphere.
But when those sea plants and creatures die, they fall to the depths. Some of the consumed carbon ends up dissolved in deep ocean waters.
"Once we had the canary in the coal mine; now we have the oyster in the ocean," says Washington Gov. Jay Inslee, a Democrat.
AN OYSTER MYSTERY
In the same year that Feely and his colleagues made their upwelling discovery, disaster struck the Whiskey Creek Shellfish Hatchery in Netarts Bay, perched on the edge of Oregon's Pacific coast. Baby oysters grown there to be shipped to shellfish farms worldwide were dying en masse, tens of millions of millimeter-size larvae filling hatching tanks, all dead.
"We were very close to going out of business. It was a major deal," says Sue Cudd of the Whiskey Creek hatchery. Bankruptcy threatened because of unfilled orders, and the entire industry faced collapse without the larvae, the seeds that shellfish growers needed to raise Pacific oysters over the next 18 months. A second hatchery run by Dewey's employers, Taylor Shellfish -- one of four in the region -- saw the same die-off the next year, with the same failure to spawn striking wild oysters in Washington's Willapa Bay, a longtime source of seeds for the industry.
It was only at the end of 2008 at a shellfish farmer's meeting that Feely delivered the bad news: On days in the summer along the West Coast when northerly winds blew, deep ocean water was  likely dissolving the fragile young oysters.
Without industrial emissions of greenhouse gases, the upwelling wouldn't be a problem because really corrosive water wouldn't get high enough to reach the surface, says Burke Hales of Oregon State University in Corvallis. "That extra kick from  (man-made) carbon is what pushes the saturation point high enough," Hales says. "Anyone who says this is a natural thing just doesn't get it or is missing that key point."
Shellfish rely on calcium to build their shells, and a more corrosive water makes that harder for them to the point of becoming impossible.
Alan Barton, the staff scientist at Whiskey Creek, realized the seawater was far too acidic and started making phone calls to Hales to have the water examined. Last year, Barton, Hales and colleagues, including Feely, definitively showed that those deep waters do dissolve baby oysters only a few days old, ones which rely on a very soft form of calcium for their initial growth spurt.
"A lot of people out here I talk to don't believe in climate change, but ocean acidification -- to them that's real -- because they can see it eating into their livelihoods," Hales says.  "The chemistry is really simple and really inevitable: More carbon in the air means more carbon in the ocean, and there is no getting around it."
AN OCEAN-SIZE CHALLENGE
Benoit Eudeline, staff scientist for Taylor Shellfish,  and colleagues such as Barton at Whiskey Creek have become evangelists on the topic for the seafood industry, warning their colleagues on the East Coast of what is coming. There, deep-water upwelling is not a problem, but warmer waters have shifted crab and fish populations while acidic mud on the Maine seafloor has hurt clamming.
"We were joking about what size antacid tablet you would need to fix the ocean," Eudeline said. "It is so tremendous that you can only make jokes about it."
That's because the ocean absorbs 23% of all man-made carbon dioxide emissions, according to a 2012 Earth System Science Data journal report, more than 8 billion tons of the stuff every year. It would take a very large Alka-Seltzer tablet to fix that. "That's why talk about just avoiding warming from here on out in the atmosphere is missing the effects that are already locked in due to ocean acidification," Feely says.
Back on the tidal inlet at Oyster Bay, Dewey walks along rotting wooden dike walls placed there more than a century ago, by earlier shellfish farmers, down to where the low tide has fallen. All kinds of shellfish and other sea life, including the famed salmon of the Pacific Northwest, live in these same waters,  enjoying the bounty of these waves.
"We only know what is happening to shellfish because they have spokesmen," Dewey says. "Only the good Lord knows what is happening to everything else out there." 




Brace for a hard-nosed allergy season; Increasing temperatures mean pollen is out in force, and likely to stay there



This year's spring allergy season is nothing to sniff at: It may be longer and stronger, allergists say.
Blooming trees have been releasing pollen into the air, triggering  reactions in some people. The start of tree pollination varies across the country, and cold spells in certain regions cause pollen levels to fluctuate.
Higher mean temperatures from climate change affect tree pollination, says Richard Weber, president of the American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology: "We are seeing trees not only pollinate earlier but also produce more pollen."
Some people who are sensitive to tree pollen also may feel the effects of grass pollen as spring gives way to summer. They may get a break before ragweed pollen hits in the fall.
But many people with spring and summer allergies may not get relief until July, when it gets very hot and pollen counts drop,  says William Berger, an adviser for the Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America.
Higher pollen levels may worsen symptoms for some people, but the effects vary from person to person,  says Weber, an allergist in Denver.
With an allergy, the immune system overreacts to a trigger substance, or allergen. Outdoor allergies (also known as seasonal allergic rhinitis or hay fever) occur when allergens found outdoors are inhaled into the nose and lungs.
Common allergens are tree pollen in the spring, grass pollen in the summer and weed pollen in the fall, as well as mold spores. Outdoor mold spores peak in July in warmer states and in October in colder states.
A study in the September issue of the journal Annals of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology echoed the influence  of climate change on allergies. The study linked increased pollen concentrations and lengthened allergy seasons to warmer temperatures.
The ragweed pollen season has grown as much as 13 to 27 days longer since 1995, a study from the U.S. Department of Agriculture reported in 2011. It linked the later end of the season to higher temperatures from climate change.
Weber says that with increased exposure to allergens because of longer pollen seasons, more people may become sensitized. "Older patients are coming in with new onset of hay fever," he says.
About 16.9 million U.S. adults were diagnosed with hay fever in 2011, according to the  National Health Interview Survey. About 6.7 million  children in the USA were reported to have hay fever.
Pollen and mold are also among the allergens that can trigger asthma attacks.
Asthma, a chronic disease affecting the lungs, causes breathlessness, chest tightness, coughing and wheezing. In 2010, about 18.7 million adults and 7 million children had asthma in the USA, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's National Asthma Control Program.
To find out if you have symptoms of allergies or allergic asthma, you can start with an online self-test from the American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology.
If you have allergies, treatment includes avoidance of allergens, medication and immunotherapy, such as allergy shots.
Berger, an allergist in Mission Viejo, Calif., says it is important to see a board-certified allergist for diagnosis and treatment. He says having allergies is "a common problem but has a huge impact on quality of life."
---
You can count on pollen as a culprit
Watch the pollen count. If pollen counts are high, you may want to avoid outdoor activities during early-morning hours. You can check pollen counts on  websites such as AccuWeather.com and the NationalAllergy Bureau.  AllergyCapitals.com ranks cities by pollen counts, medication use and number of board-certified allergists.
When driving, keep your car windows closed.
When you're home, keep your bedroom windows closed.
Clean your air-conditioning filters regularly.
If you have been outdoors, take a shower and wash your hair to get rid of any pollen. 



Global warmth: Oceans are taking it all in; Waters heat up as atmosphere holds steady, study says



The temperature of Earth's atmosphere has been essentially the same for the past decade or so, providing ammunition for skeptics of human-caused climate change. (This despite the fact that of the nine hottest years on record, eight have occurred since 2000, according to the National Climatic Data Center).
However, a recent study found that heat absorbed by Earth's oceans has increased significantly over the same period, prompting the study co-authors to say that the warming has been diverted and is heating the oceans instead of the atmosphere.
The study was published in the journal Geophysical Research Letters, a publication of the American Geophysical Union.
The current "hiatus" in atmospheric warming is temporary,  says study co-author Kevin Trenberth of the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo., during a telephone news conference Thursday: "Global warming is continuing but manifesting itself differently."
Here's how scientists say global warming works: Increasing amounts of carbon dioxide and other gases caused by the burning of the oil, gas and coal that power our world are enhancing the natural "greenhouse effect," causing the temperature of the atmosphere and oceans to warm to levels that climate scientists say cannot be linked to natural forces.
"Over 90% of the heat trapped by greenhouse gases winds up warming the oceans," said Josh Willis, a scientist with NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory.  "Oceans cover two-thirds of the Earth's surface, so it's expected that they'll play a large role in how climate change and global warming play out."
A large chunk of the warmth appears to be settling far down in the ocean about a half-mile beneath the surface, Trenbreth says. New technology over the past decade or so have allowed scientists to better measure the temperature of the deep oceans, Willis says.
While Earth's excess heat comes from climate change, the amount that's absorbed into the oceans (as opposed to staying in the atmosphere) appears to be due to natural changes in climatic wind and ocean patterns, according to the study.
Temporary pauses and restarts in atmospheric temperature shouldn't detract from the main story: "The planet is warming, climate change is happening and the primary cause is greenhouse gases released by human activities," Willis says. 



Warming not a factor in last year's drought



The cause of last year's devastating drought in the central U.S. -- which cost  at least $35 billion according to one estimate -- was a series of natural variations in weather that cannot be placed at the feet of global warming, according to a report released Thursday by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
The lead author of the report was Marty Hoerling, a scientist with NOAA's Earth System Research Laboratory in Boulder, Colo.
The study found  two meteorological reasons for the drought: The low-pressure systems that normally dump  rain in May and June did not occur, nor did the usual summer thunderstorms in July and August.
"Together, these conditions conspired to create a four-month sequence of record rainfall reduction over the central Great Plains," Hoerling writes in the report, which also attributes the drought to a "sequence of unfortunate events."
In fact, 2012 rainfall deficits from May to August were the most severe since official measurements began in 1895, and were worse than the driest summers of 1934 and 1936 that occurred during the height of the Dust Bowl, the report said.
This long period of rainfall  deficits, along with above normal temperatures, resulted in the largest area of the contiguous U.S. in drought since the U.S. Drought Monitor began in January 2000.
The Drought Monitor is a weekly federal report on drought across the U.S. At its peak last summer, moderate to extreme levels of drought gripped 61% of the contiguous  48 states. At $35 billion, the drought was the nation's costliest natural disaster of the year after Hurricane Sandy ($65 billion), according to data released earlier this year from global reinsurance firm Aon Benfield. 



When rain, rain won't go away; One storm at a time, 'extreme precipitation' is assaulting the unprepared Northeast



"I'd never seen the river that high," says Susan Hammond. "But I was pretty certain the bridge wasn't going anywhere."
She was wrong.
On  Aug. 28, 2011, Tropical Storm Irene's rains swelled the Williams River, smashing dams, flooding homes and carrying off the historic Lower Bartonsville Covered Bridge.
This wasn't just another 1-in-500-years event happening, a freak occurrence, a one-off event. Rather, experts see it as the new normal across the Northeast, the latest in a series of calamitous weather events occurring because of, or amplified by, climate change.
From valleys staggered by Irene, to coasts battered by Superstorm Sandy, the 24-hour outbursts of rain and snow, or "extreme precipitation," has increased by 74% in the past six decades there, according to January's draft of the federal National Climate Assessment report.
Such storms have become the signature of climate change across the Northeast, afflicting older cities and towns built at a time of more modest rainfall. This heavy flooding is undermining aging bridges, eroding roads and overwhelming drainage systems.
 traveled to the birch- and maple-dappled hills of Vermont as the third stop in a year-long series to explore places where climate change is already changing lives.
"I grew up here. I live here now," Hammond says, standing on the gravel road leading to the covered bridge's crossing. "The bridge has always been here."
That bridge, and hundreds more like it, were damaged in the storm, along with dams, roads, houses and most everything in sight. Three people died and more than $700 million in damage was sustained in Vermont alone.  Before trailing off in Canada, Irene had killed 49 people and caused more than $10 billion in damages in 2011, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
That was only a warm-up for last year's Superstorm Sandy, which delivered even more crippling blows, killing more than 130 people nationwide and causing more than $75 billion in damages.
Hammer blows such as these storms are consistent with climate change's expected effects on the Northeast, says climatologist Cameron Wake of the University of New Hampshire in Durham.
"It's not just those two storms," he says. "We are suddenly seeing many extreme precipitation events, ones that have led to several 100-year floods across the region just in the last 15 years."
The soggy misfortune of these extreme events has reached well beyond the Northeast. From the upper Midwest, suffering from recent flooding, to the desert Southwest, where flash floods are more likely even amid sparser rain overall, high-intensity storms are more frequent. But nowhere is the increase as pronounced as in the Northeast, where already-moist air means more extreme "extreme precipitation."
The more intense rainfall is a direct impact of warmer air temperatures tied to climate change juicing the weather cycle, according to the federal assessment report. Average temperatures in the region -- the home of some 64 million people stretching from Washington, D.C., to Portland, Maine -- have increased 2 degrees Fahrenheit in the past century, with most of the increase coming in the past three decades.
The increase largely results from heat-trapping carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases emitted into the air by burning coal, oil and other fossil fuels, boosting temperatures to spur increases seen worldwide in this century.
STORMS CHANGE 'EVERYTHING'
Amid trees just starting to bud with spring, Vermont's State Road 121 follows the twisting course of the Saxtons River. Along the way, Timothy Cullenen, who was municipal manager of nearby Rockingham, Vt., during Irene, points out wrecked homes and condemned, covered bridges with sidewalls beaten out and replaced.
"We had roads washed out, people trapped in homes," Cullenen says, recounting how firefighters had to boat people out of homes inundated by a river suddenly stuffed with battering-ram-size trees and hissing propane tanks with broken valves. The frequency of these storms "changes everything for us, from what size culverts we build, to where people can live," Cullenen says.
The Northeast averages about 55 inches of rain and snow annually, according to NOAA records. That's 10% more than just over a century ago.
What's causing the additional rain? It's simple. Warmer air causes more evaporation from streams, lakes and seas. Warmer air also holds more moisture. So, when it falls, it really unloads -- thus, more extreme storms.
"Increased extreme precipitation in the Northeast is one of the clearest signals of climate change that we can see nationwide," says climate expert Donald Wuebbles of the University of Illinois in Urbana-Champaign. "It's not just more rain, but more rain falling in buckets over long periods of time."
In the hills of the Northeast, heavy rains are funneled into valley streams and rivers, carrying timber and sand downstream. "Bridges become dams when the water rises and this stuff slams into them," says FEMA historic preservation expert Peter Thomas.
In Irene, ground already saturated with rainwater couldn't handle the downpour, making flooding more likely. (Rainfall totaled more than 25 inches for much of the Northeast in August and September 2011, compared with about 8 inches normally.)
"Streams and rivers scoured out by floods just become race tracks for the next flood," Thomas says. "They won't have as much time to naturally restore themselves if climate change is making floods more common."
'OH MY GOD': BRIDGE CRUMBLES
"I never had been able to see the river from my window in August before," Hammond says of the day the bridge washed out. All morning, she and her neighbors had walked down to the bridge to see the river rise. Recording a video of the flooding, she captured the terrible creaking of the century-old structure and sight of it unrolling off its abutments into the water below. The wood tumbled in the river for a half-mile.
Hammond's video and heartfelt, "Oh, my God," response to the bridge's disappearance went viral on YouTube, seen by more than a half-million people and shown widely on television. "I had no idea it had gone viral until my sister told me days later, after we got power back," Hammond says.
The bridge had been in place since 1870. Now its wreckage sits, three rows of timber in Rockingham's winter gravel dump, joined by stumps, trees and junk pulled from the river by the town at a cost of $450,000.
"We used to have an emergency fund. And then we had an emergency. Now it is gone," Cullenen says. "But we still might have another emergency."
CITIES STRUGGLE TO ADAPT
Towns and cities across the Northeast are built for the wrong century -- the last one -- says civil engineer Paul Kirshen of Climate Solutions New England, a colleague of Wake, the climatologist. "We've seen the 'once in a century' storm's water level increase," he says. Where a storm with a 1% chance of happening every year used to dump 6 inches of water (162,924 gallons per acre), that same storm now delivers 8 inches (217,232 gallons per acre), according to the U.S. Geological Survey.
That means street drains aren't big enough and wastewater facilities can't handle floods. Culverts, the large pipes that carry water under roads, are increasingly being washed out across the region, according to a 2009 Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology study. Expensive sewer systems built for last century's specifications are too small to handle the extra water. More cars and more people mean more pavement, which dumps water on towns built in the horse-and-buggy era, instead of letting it soak in.
For cities such as Philadelphia and Exeter, N.H., one solution has been to try "low-impact" development: planting more greenery in a bid to soak up rainwater before it hits the drains. Another change has been "flexible" development, in which reservoirs and seawalls are designed so that additions can be made, if needed. "That's a total change in engineering," Kirshen says. "In the past, we built to specifications for now, and walked away."
A longer-term solution, Wake points out, is "putting less greenhouse gas in the air."
Depending on future emissions, average yearly temperatures will increase anywhere from 3 to 10 degrees by the 2080s, according to the draft federal National Climate Assessment report.
NEW ENGLAND'S ESSENCE
Standing on the gravel road leading to her Vermont hamlet, Hammond looks at the rebuilt Lower Bartonsville Covered Bridge, its spruce sides gleaming blond in the sunlight, the sawmill scent of fresh-cut wood hanging in the air. The new bridge, built to historical standards, now exceeds its original length by 17 feet to stretch 168 feet across the Williams River. It rests on concrete abutments with pilings driven 40 feet into the ground -- not the stone causeways that were undermined in the 2011 flood.
"A covered bridge is part of what New England is, and it connected us to the world," Hammond says. "Maybe you have to live here to understand it. It really was quite a blow to see it pulled away."
The new bridge is designed to last 75 years, taking it almost to the end of the century, when it will face a very different New England.
"Unless something happens again," Hammond says, before walking back to her home. 




Batteries up! Stored-energy research buzzes; Nations expand on carbon-free renewable power



On an arid mountain in Eureka County, Nev., a mining company believes it's struck the 21st-century equivalent of gold.
The precious commodity is vanadium, a metal that can be extracted from shale rock and used to make powerful, long-lasting batteries for cars, homes and utilities.
If Vancouver-based American Vanadium gets federal approval for its proposed Gibellini Hill Project -- a 30-day public comment period ends May 29  -- it will operate the only vanadium mine in the United States.
The battle to build a better battery is intensifying as the United States and other countries, faced with growing global demand for electricity and a need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions that worsen climate change, look to expand carbon-free renewable energy such as wind and solar.
Batteries are key. They can directly power electric cars and buses, and indirectly, homes and big buildings, by storing solar and wind power for times when the sun doesn't shine and the wind doesn't blow. They balance out renewables that produce energy intermittently, so consumers can power laptops or run refrigerators 24/7.
The race is on. Universities, start-ups and major companies are working with new materials such as vanadium, or tweaking the lithium-ion battery that Sony introduced more than 20 years ago for personal electronics. Some advances, such as the ones that Toyota and IBM are developing to power cars for 500-plus miles on a single charge, won't make it to market for at least five years.
Others are making their debuts this year, including a battery by Ontario, Canada-based Electrovaya, which enables homes with solar panels to go entirely off grid, or one by General Electric, which will be paired with a Texas wind farm to provide continuous power.
"It's the dawn of the energy-storage age," says Bill Radvak, president of American Vanadium, which is partnering with the German CellCube battery manufacturer Gildemeister. He says storage could be the "holy grail" for renewable energy. "There was no major battery market three years ago," he says, adding that is changing quickly.
In February, California, which mandates that 33% of its electricity come from renewable sources by 2020, required a Los Angeles-area utility to ensure some capacity comes from energy storage. On May 1, Germany, which is shuttering its nuclear power plants as it boosts renewables, began subsidizing homeowners' purchases of batteries to store power from solar panels. China's five-year plan calls for 5% of all electricity to be stored by 2020. In the United States, about 2% of electric capacity is pumped-hydro storage: water that sits behind dams that generates electricity when sent through tubines.
The global market for storing power from solar panels is forecast to explode, from less than $200 million in 2012 to $19 billion by 2017, according to a report  by IMS Research.
One factor driving this growth is the plummeting price of renewables, especially solar panels, which have fallen at least 60% since the beginning of 2011. As a result, industry groups report historic growth as U.S. electric capacity from solar panels jumped 76% and from wind turbines rose 28% last year alone.
OBSTACLES AHEAD
Still, batteries face obstacles, including cost and safety. Lithium-ion batteries aboard two Boeing 787 jets failed in January, causing a fire on one  and smoke on the other. In March, batteries from one manufacturer caused problems in two Mitsubishi vehicles: a hybrid Outlander car overheated and an all-electric i-MiEV caught fire during testing at an assembly plant.
While the EV industry says these incidents are the exception rather than the rule, money has also been a problem. In October, Massachusetts-based A123, a lithium-ion battery manufacturer that spent $132 million in federal stimulus funds, filed for bankruptcy  protection. In December, Wanxiang American, the U.S. arm of a Chinese automotive parts giant, bought A123's technology.
Toyota's Jaycie Chitwood said lithium-ion batteries are too expensive to make electric cars cost-competitive without subsidies. Speaking at the Advanced Energy 2013 conference last month in New York City, she said Toyota is expanding its line of electric vehicles to meet the U.S. government's fuel-efficiency targets -- not because they're profitable. She said it gives a $14,000 discount for each new electric RAV4.
"Batteries continue to be a challenge," especially those for electric vehicles, Esther Takeuchi, chemistry professor at SUNY Stony Brook, said at the same conference. "Things aren't where we'd want them to be, but they're getting closer."
Her university and others, some with federal funding, are looking not only at new chemical mixes but also at nano-sizing the chemical elements -- making them microscopically small -- to make them more efficient. Takeuchi said successful batteries often have specific applications, such as lead-acid versions for auto ignition or lithium-iodine for pacemakers. She said lithium-ion has worked well in cellphones and laptops, their initial use.
Batteries will improve, "but not at the pace that we've seen in recent years," writes Richard Muller, a physics professor at the University of California-Berkeley, in his 2012 book, Energy for Future Presidents: The Science Behind the Headlines. He says  growing demand for portable electronics sped the development of already-known battery technologies, and it will take awhile to commercialize new ones such as lithium-air.
Batteries are  one of many ways to store grid-scale energy. The most common is pumped hydroelectric.
"Storage is the glue that can hold the grid together," said Matthew Maroon of GE Energy. GE, which opened a $100 million factory in Schenectady, N.Y., to build a sodium nickel-chloride battery, announced earlier this month  that Invenergy will install its Brilliant wind turbine with Durathon batteries at a Texas wind farm later this year.
The U.S. government is promoting energy storage. In November, the Department of Energy announced grants for 23 research-and-development projects and picked Argonne National Laboratory in Lemont, Ill., as the first  "innovation hub" for batteries and energy storage. Argonne will receive $120 million over five years.
Batteries are getting particular attention because they're versatile. While pumped hydro facilities require lots of land and water and are meant for utility-scale projects, batteries can be used anywhere and are easily scalable, so they can help power not only a car but a factory.
"Everyone's finally realizing, 'Hey, this works.' ... It's the key to the future," says Brad Roberts of the Electricity Storage Association, an industry group. He says the industry's hiccups are part of its growth, and adds: "I don't see any hesitation on the part of venture capitalists."
ALTERNATIVES IN WORKS
IBM's Allan Schurr is bullish on his company's new lithium-air battery, which takes in oxygen from the air to form a chemical reaction that generates an electric charge.  It's lighter and denser than the lithium-ion ones in most of today's electric vehicles, which use heavy metal oxides to drive the chemical reactions that produce power.
"The performance we've seen in tests so far is at or above our expectations," he says. With 500 miles on a single charge, he says, "You'd take the 'range anxiety' out of the equation." The current Nissan Leaf gets up to 75 miles on a single charge, and the Mitsubishi i-MiEV, 62 miles. Schurr expects a prototype to be developed next year, but its commercial availability will take at least five years.
Toshiba has developed a rechargeable lithium-ion battery, the SCiB, that has a new oxide-based material, lithium titanate, that allows quicker charging times. It's used in the Honda Fit's EV and Mitsubishi's i-MiEV.
Huge lithium-ion batteries, filling 53-foot shipping containers, are being used for grid-scale projects. Since September 2011 on a ridge of Laurel Mountain in West Virginia, AES Energy Storage has used them to store 64 megawatts of energy generated by windmills. That capacity, if it ran continuously, would be enough to power nearly 50,000 U.S. households for a year.
"There's no one battery technology that is one-size-fits-all," says GE's Maroon. He says each has its advantages and disadvantages, and, "The market is big enough for each technology to survive."
---
A glossary of common batteries
Batteries often work the same basic way even if they use different metals. They are mini-power plants that produce electricity by creating chemical reactions. As atoms move between two plates of different metals via a chemical solution called an electrolyte, they produce voltage that's discharged through a metal wire on the other side.
Lead-acid (auto ignition): They have atoms pass from a plate of metallic lead through sulfuric acid to a plate of solid lead oxide.
Lithium-ion (personal electronics, electric vehicles): They have carbon on one end and a metal oxide on the other, using lithium salt in an organic compound as the electrolyte in the middle.
Lithium-air (still in development; possible uses include electric vehicles): They use lithium metal and oxygen as inputs at the two ends.
Nickel-cadmium (portable electronics, electric vehicles): Their metal plates are nickel-oxide hydroxide and cadmium.
Sodium-sulfur (electric vehicles, grid-scale storage): A type of molten-salt battery, it's made from liquid sodium and sulfur.
Vanadium redox flow (grid-scale storage): They use vanadium, a metal named for Vanadis -- the Scandinavian goddess of beauty and youth -- in different oxidation states to store chemical energy for repeated use. 



Pollen plague; How climate change is affecting every breath you take



melrose park, ill. From the roof of the Gottlieb Memorial Hospital in the Chicago suburbs, an 83-year-old retired doctor finds troubling evidence of why so many people are sneezing and itching their eyes.
Joseph Leija counts the pollen and mold spores that collect on slides inside an air-sucking machine atop the six-story building.
"There's been an increase, no doubt about it," he says of the 5 a.m. weekday counts that he's been doing as a volunteer for 24 years.
"My allergies are much worse than they used to be," says Amanda Carwyle, a mom of three who lives 95 miles south in Pontiac, Ill. "I used to be able to take a Benadryl or Claritin and be fine." Now, despite three medications and allergy shots that make her feel a bit like a zombie, she says her eyes are watery and her head stuffy. "I'm so miserable."
Climate change might be partly to blame. Scientists see a link to carbon dioxide, a heat-trapping greenhouse gas emitted by burning coal, oil and other fossil fuels. Tests show that the more CO2 in the atmosphere, the more plants generally grow and the more pollen they produce.
Though some plants grow more food or flowers as a result, more pollen can spell trouble. Doctors say it's contributing to a rise in seasonal hay fever and allergic asthma in the USA, where the pollen season has lengthened up to 16 days since 1995. If carbon dioxide emissions continue to increase, they expect allergic conditions probably will worsen, adding to the discomfort of allergy suffers as well as swelling U.S. health care costs.
 traveled to Chicago, which recently ranked as the sixth worst U.S. city for ragweed sensitivity, as the fourth stop in a year-long series to explore places where climate change is changing lives.
"We've definitely seen a big increase in patients," says allergist Brian Rotskoff, whose Clarity Allergy Center has offices a half-hour drive from where Leija counts pollen. He says some kids are coming in at younger ages, and some adults are having worse symptoms or problems for the first time.
"The severity is affecting their quality of life," he says, noting they're having trouble sleeping and focusing at work or school. Symptoms such as congestion, shortness of breath, coughing, runny nose, sneezing and itchy eyes result when an allergic person inhales an allergen such as pollen, a plant's sperm, and overreacts by releasing histamine.
Sakina Bajowala, an allergist in nearby North Aurora, says she's also seen more patients with respiratory allergies. She has a new adult patient who had been fine with over-the-counter medications but says "he's just miserable now."
THE CARBON CONNECTION
"The link between rising carbon dioxide and pollen is pretty clear," says Lewis Ziska, a weed ecologist at the U.S. Department of Agriculture and a top researcher in the field.
His lab tests show that pollen production rises along with carbon dioxide. It doubled from 5 grams to 10 grams per plant when CO2 in the atmosphere rose from 280 parts per million (ppm) in 1900 to 370 ppm in 2000. He expects it could double again, to 20 grams, by 2075 if carbon emissions continue to climb. The world's CO2 concentration is about 400 ppm.
"I noticed something changing," says Leonard Bielory, an allergy and immunology expert at Rutgers University's Center for Environmental Prediction. He's been counting pollen in New Jersey for 27 years and initially wondered whether the spike was because of El Nio, a warm ocean current.
"I saw a trend as I did an analysis," he says, noting his counts in the past five years have been double that of any prior five-year period. In fact, this year's levels are the highest since he began. Bielory expects they could increase 20% to 30% by 2020.
He says last year's Superstorm Sandy exacerbated the problem by soaking the soil with so much water that even though April was dry, pollen has reached record local levels.
"There's clear evidence that pollen season is lengthening and total pollen is increasing," says George Luber, associate director for climate change at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. "It's one of the ways climate change is already affecting your community."
A 2011 study by Ziska and Bielory found that the ragweed season, which peaks in the fall (trees peak in spring and grass in summer), got longer the farther north you go where temperatures have risen more in recent decades. So in  Oklahoma City, the season increased only one day from 1995 to 2009, but it jumped 16 days in Minneapolis and Fargo, N.D., and 27 days in Saskatoon, Canada.
Perhaps not surprisingly, more Americans are testing positive for allergies. Quest Diagnostics, which administers a blood test to detect allergies, found a 15% increase in ragweed sensitivity from 2005 to 2009. It says Chicago's rate was the sixth highest -- after Phoenix, Las Vegas, Dallas, Kansas City and Riverside, Calif. -- and one of every five Americans is allergic to ragweed in all U.S. regions except the Southeast and Pacific Northwest where fewer people are sensitive.
CDC allergy skin tests found increased sensitivity not only to ragweed but also to ryegrass, Bermuda grass and mold nationwide between two surveys that spanned an 18-year period, 1976 to 1994. The tests also showed more sensitivity to oak, except in the South. The study's authors say methodology changes might account for some, but not likely all, of the increase, which is consistent with that found in other countries.
A new CDC report suggests pediatric rates of hay fever, more common than drug or food allergies, remained stable from 1997 to 2011, based on interviews with parents. Co-author Lara Akinbami, a CDC pediatrician, says hay fever may still be increasing but, since its symptoms are similar to those of the common cold, parents may not recognize it as a seasonal allergy. They also might simply be treating it with over-the-counter medicines.
As for asthma, doctors say it's caused by many factors and exacerbated by pollen for the majority of asthmatics with allergic conditions. Federal data report a 17% increase in U.S. asthma prevalence from 2001 through mid-2012.
Asthma has become a "national epidemic" that affects one of every 12 people, or 56 million, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency said this month.  Most pediatric cases involve allergies, primarily hay fever.
Luber says many Americans don't suffer directly, but they all pay: "There are substantial costs to the health care system (from allergic conditions) that we all carry."
Scientists agree that rising pollen counts aren't all bad. In some cases, they boost the production of corn and other crops.
"It's true that some plants will be able to grow in new places they couldn't before," says Kim Knowlton, a Columbia University professor of public health who focuses on climate impacts. She says global warming could mean fewer people die of cold-related deaths.
"On balance, the negatives outweigh the positives," she says, citing other health problems that could ensue. More illness and deaths are likely from wildfires, flooding, heat-related strokes and infectious diseases such as cholera, according to the U.S. government's third National Climate Assessment, a draft of which was released in January.
Aside from pollen, the report says climate change could increase other factors that contribute to respiratory allergies and asthma. It points to higher summertime ozone concentrations, which make it more difficult to breathe, as well as more heavy downpours and rising air temperatures, which foster the growth of indoor fungi and molds.
SUFFERING THE IMPACT
For Carol Leopold and her 13-year-old twin sons, the pollen count is personal. She says their allergies have worsened in the past couple of years and they hit their peak in May, when spring comes alive.
"Anything that blooms enervates us. It wears us down," says Leopold, 43. She takes an antihistamine every day. When she goes on her 5:30 a.m. runs along Prairie Path in Elmhurst, Ill, a Chicago suburb where she lives, she takes her inhaler along.
Donovan Gill, 3, one of Rotskoff's patients, started showing symptoms two years ago. "We'd go to the playground, and if there was a honey locust tree and little yellow pieces of pollen fell from it, he'd blow up like a balloon," says Donovan's mom, Rachel, who lives in Chicago. "His eyes would start to water and get red and swell."
She says his adenoids -- glands in the back of the nasal cavity that can become swollen -- were removed to help clear his airways. She has had to look extra hard for a preschool with clean, well-ventilated classrooms because, like many people with hay fever, Donovan reacts to mold.
Carwyle, 35, says she limits her exposure to pollen by staying mostly indoors during allergy season. "You try not to sleep with the window open," she says. Her 7-year-old son, who had only a few bad days last year, has just started allergy shots because of his sensitivity to -- in her words -- "anything that grows."
She says spring hit with a bang this year, as reflected in Leija's high counts of both tree and grass pollen. On a morning in mid-May, she recalls, "my whole car was coated with pollen."
CHALLENGES AHEAD
Researchers looking at how climate change will affect plants, pollen counts and health are the first to say there's a lot they don't know.
Bielory, for example, is doing EPA-funded research to try to figure out -- based on historical data as well as multiple factors such as wind patterns, precipitation and population growth -- how much pollen counts will probably rise.
In lab chambers, he's growing different weeds and grasses at three different temperatures and CO2 concentrations.
He's also looking at whether food allergies, in addition to hay fever, are affected by rising carbon dioxide emissions. He suspects they are.
"There are so many pieces of the puzzle, and it's not a flat puzzle. It's a 3-D puzzle," says Bielory, who says too few scientists study the connections. He devotes two days each week to research and spends the other three treating patients.
The puzzle has non-climate pieces, too. Researchers are looking at why more people are becoming allergic and finding links to chemicals and, perhaps counterintuitively, cleanliness.
The "hygiene hypothesis," backed by some but not all studies, suggests people are more prone to allergies and asthma when they're not exposed to germs early in life. Why? Their immune systems haven't learned what's dangerous, such as bacteria, so they overreact to allergens, which are otherwise harmless.
"All of these things are likely affecting us," says the CDC's Akinbami, but it's unclear which factors -- chemicals, hygiene, pollen -- have the most impact or what their relationship is to each other. She says the first two sensitize people and the third triggers their sensitivity.
On the pollen front alone, there are large gaps in the data, says the CDC's Luber, noting pollen counts are not done on weekends and don't cover every state. There's not a single pollen-counting station in Alaska, Hawaii or 16 other U.S. states.
In fact, the 76 U.S. stations (plus one in Puerto Rico) are run by volunteers trained and certified by the National Allergy Bureau, part of the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology (AAAAI), a private organization that promotes research and treatment.
"There's no federal funding," says Linda Ford, an allergist who volunteers to do the count for the Omaha area as a way to help her patients. "There is no automated service for this," she says, adding it can take as long as two or three hours.
"This is very important for patients, " says Leija, who does the only count in Illinois. He says if they know pollen season is coming, they can start medications in advance to help control their symptoms.
That's why, even though he retired last year after working 53 years at the hospital as a general practitioner and allergist, he continues to rise before the sun and climb the stairs from the sixth floor to the roof -- rain or shine. When it's still dark outside, he wears a miner's head lamp.
"It's a hobby," Leija says as he removes a pollen and mold slide from the Burkard Spore Trap. The $5,000 device, which the AAAAI provides to counting stations, has a fan that draws air in at the same rate that people breathe.
He starts early, so he can decipher the amount and types of pollen, using a microscope on the third floor, in time for the 7 a.m. TV news. He knows that someday he'll have to hand off his sunrise routine. His wife is ailing, so he's been working alongside a nurse who's getting certified to carry on the count.
Changing Climate
Rising carbon dioxide may be  driving you right to your doctor's office. Here's one way climate  change affects your health:
1) Carbon dioxide is a heat-trapping   greenhouse gas that's   emitted when burning fossil fuels,   such as gasoline from your car.
2) The added CO2 in the atmosphere  stimulates plant growth.   And bigger plants in turn produce   more pollen. This creates a sniffly   mess for people who suffer from  allergies.
3)  In the early 20th century, CO2  concentrations were at 280 parts   per million and could reach 720  by 2075.
Early 1900s:         280  parts per million
Projected  2075:    720  parts per million


With social media, who needs 'experts'?; All we need is, oh, 140 characters



Global warming is a hoax. Now, now, now, before you get your recycled panties -- undoubtedly made out of a Lays Baked Kale Chip bag -- in a bunch, hear me out. I, like many "uninformed" Americans, read article after article claiming that "97% of climate science research" by so-called experts agreed that climate change is man-made.
However, on the fateful night of April 6, in the 13th year of the Lord's 21st Century, I received a tweet from DeepCowboyRenegade32 telling me I was "a ##@$%g idiot. Global warning is a man-made hoax, perpetrated by the liberal agenda."
It was a moment of truth. Three things became abundantly clear. 1) Spellcheck on Twitter does not recognize that "global warning" is not a term. 2) Can there possibly be 31 other DeepCowboyRenegades? And 3) How could I have been so naive  as to trust  the "research" done by experts over the past three decades when DeepCowboyRenegade32, (a self-described "Kitchen Utensil Vendor" in Arkansas) needed nothing but 140 characters and a commanding use of the F-word to make his point so clearly?
It turns out that passion outweighs hard fact. For years, our scientists have been looking at strata and ice deposits from the past few centuries to determine their findings. But what these "morons" didn't consider was that a group of us, call us the "uninformed passionate Tweeters," would call them out with nothing to back up our claims. Yes, their "information" may be of solid deduction and based on reasonable hypotheses, but our voices are louder and so much angrier and therefore so much righter! They may have precious grants, but we have emoticons and "unfollow" buttons. They may have computer models that determine the rate at which our seas will rise, but we have Instagram and can easily draw private parts in their mouths to shut them up.
You see, the age of social media has finally empowered each of us to be an "expert," so we can finally call out the experts who claim to be so, based on secondary and graduate education. There is no reason that a utensil vendor in Arkansas shouldn't be able to call out a professor at Oxford who has dedicated his life to studying climate change. After all, the professor could just as easily call DeepCowboyRenegade32 out on his failure to offer sporks at weddings in Little Rock.  You don't need a diploma, just the right amount of anger and enough brain power to produce 140 characters, most of which can be grammatically unsound.
We are finally liberated from the shackles of "being informed." We are now the informant! You have a question about that rash you've had on your left buttock for the past six months? Don't bother seeing your dermatologist. Just write Deaconlovemonkey26, whose job as a car rental customer service agent is just the tip of his proverbial iceberg. Can't seem to figure out your taxes? Just send a quick tweet to Eyeeatmyownfilth78, who has an amateur hamster boxing match every other Thursday in his mom's den.
DeepCowboyRenegade32 has opened my eyes up to a world that isn't what the experts tell us it is but what that little voice in our heads that tells us when it's time to eat or poop tells us what it is. After all, we can't all be right. So, shouldn't you be the one who is?
About the author: Other than thinking of himself worthy of contributions to a leading news publication, Josh Gad spends his time pretending to be other people for a living. Among his most celebrated performances are 'The Book of Mormon.' Among his least celebrated is his high school performance of 'Fiddler on the Roof.' Josh can be seen in the upcoming features 'Jobs,' 'Thanks for Sharing' and Disney's 'Frozen.' Josh is a father and a child. 



Obama finally fighting on climate change


Russ Blinch, The Huffington Post: "President Obama is set to announce new measures on Tuesday to battle climate change in what many are hoping will be a big, broad plan that will stand as his legacy for his final years in office. ... Obama will no doubt outline how the planet is in crisis from global warming, which it is. But he also needs to sell Americans on how tough new standards for carbon polluters can lead to innovation in the broader economy. And in his Sputnik moment, he needs to say the United States risks falling behind its modern-day competitor, China, if it does not act."
Connor Simpson, The Atlantic Wire: "Obviously, the White House is also hoping tackling climate change will get them some decent press in the wake of that pesky surveillance scandal. ... The president is expected to use his executive powers to adopt a wide array of climate change measures, but no one is 100% sure what those measures are just yet. ... Nothing is going to come easy for Obama when it comes to the environment, or any other issue for that matter. There's no indication as to whether or not Obama will approve the controversial Keystone XL pipeline. That move would certainly appease Republicans and make the entire climate change slate go down easier, but it would also infuriate climate change activists."
Amy Harder, National Journal: "After putting climate change on the back burner since his legislative efforts failed in Congress three years ago, Obama appears ready to again expend political clout on the issue. ... Obama is signaling that he does, indeed, want to make this a legacy issue for his administration as he had said in both his inaugural and State of the Union addresses. ... Combating climate change via regulation is the least popular and efficient way to go, analysts say, but it may be the only tool Obama has left. The plan is already inciting political backlash on Capitol Hill."
Investor's Business Daily, editorial: "Whatever happens, though, is nothing more than political theater. It's about ensuring votes from the left, paying off support from that side and digging at the foundations of economic growth. And for what? There's no global warming dragon to slay. It has been as much a myth as any fire-breathing lizard from a children's book. A world that was supposed to be sick with a human-induced fever has gone 17 years and four months without any statistically significant warming."
Andrew Restuccia, Politico: "If Gina McCarthy (nominee for administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency) didn't already have a target on her back, she does now. The president's high-profile climate change speech Tuesday -- which will include a directive to the EPA to get moving on climate change regulations -- only intensifies the already-complicated politics surrounding her confirmation. ... The president's decision to refocus on climate change sends a message to Republican members of Congress that their opposition to climate regulations and McCarthy's nomination isn't going to stand in the way of administrative action."
Bridget Johnson, PJ Tatler: "With scandals still brewing, the Senate rushing toward a vote on a massive immigration reform bill, and 'reset' Russia having facilitated the flight of NSA leaker Edward Snowden, the White House is naturally turning its focus this week to ... climate change." 



Obama to call for carbon cuts at power plants; Game plan to address climate change likely to take a long, global view



President Obama plans to announce new rules today to restrict carbon pollution at new and existing power plants, part of what he calls a comprehensive plan to combat climate change.
In a speech at Georgetown University, Obama will also direct the Interior Department to permit new wind, solar, and other renewable energy projects on public lands, enough to power 6-million-plus homes by 2020.
New energy-efficiency projects are also part of the climate change plan, according to a blueprint provided by the White House.
In a video announcing the speech, Obama said he would lay out "a national plan to reduce carbon pollution, prepare our country for the impacts of climate change and lead global efforts to fight it."
Although "no single step" can reverse the existing effects of climate change, Obama said that "when it comes to the world we leave our children, we owe it to them to do what we can." He also will outline plans to prepare the nation for the impact of global warming and to seek new international agreements to address climate change on a global scale, the blueprint says.
Most of the climate change plan involves executive actions that don't require congressional approval. The president would have a difficult time getting his environmental agenda through Congress,  given a U.S. House run by Republicans and a Senate in which the GOP has enough members to mount effective filibusters.
Republicans and members of the energy industry are likely to criticize Obama's climate change plan, saying it will lead to higher utility bills and less development of reliable energy.
The president is not expected to discuss another major environmental issue in his speech: the proposed Keystone XL oil pipeline from Canada into the U.S., a project still under review by the State Department.
According to the White House blueprint, Obama will direct the Environmental Protection Agency to work with states, industry and other stakeholders to establish new carbon pollution standards for new and existing plants. He also plans to direct federal agencies to help state and local governments with existing problems caused by climate change -- such as improved flood protection for roads and other infrastructure, better hospitals to respond to increasingly powerful storms, and drought relief.
Calling for action on climate change in his State of the Union Address on Feb. 12, Obama said that "some may still deny the overwhelming judgment of science, but none can avoid the devastating impact of raging fires and crippling drought and more powerful storms."
As part of a global approach to climate change, Obama plans to call for an end of  federal support for public financing of new coal-fired plants overseas. Exceptions would be made "for the most efficient coal technology available in the world's poorest countries, or facilities deploying carbon capture and sequestration technologies," according to the blueprint. 



What we're following


NEWS President Obama announces a series of executive orders to help combat climate change during a speech today at Georgetown University. The centerpiece is to issue regulations to curb greenhouse-gas emissions from new and existing power plants. Get more details at usatoday.com/news.
NEWS The Supreme Court convenes again today to announce more rulings.
Six cases, including gay marriage and voting rights, remain this term. View rulings at usatoday.com/news.
NEWS Massachusetts voters decide today on a new senator to fill the seat held by Secretary of State John Kerry. The special election pits longtime Democratic Rep. Ed Markey against Republican businessman Gabriel Gomez. See who wins at usatoday.com/news.
MONEY Economic reports out this morning: durable goods for May; Standard & Poor's/Case-Shiller index of home prices for April; new home sales for May; and the Consumer Confidence Index for June. Check the numbers at usatoday.com/money.
SPORTS Action at Wimbledon resumes today with defending women's champion Serena Williams in center court. Game, set and match at tennis.usatoday.com.
What's popular online:
WikiLeaks' Assange
calls the shots on Snowden
Smithfield Foods severs ties with Paula Deen
Police question Scottie Pippen after Malibu assault 



Obama to call for carbon cuts at power plants; Game plan to address climate change likely to take a long, global view



President Obama plans to announce new rules today to restrict carbon pollution at new and existing power plants, part of what he calls a comprehensive plan to combat climate change.
In a speech at Georgetown University, Obama will also direct the Interior Department to permit new wind, solar, and other renewable energy projects on public lands, enough to power 6-million-plus homes by 2020.
New energy-efficiency projects are also part of the climate change plan, according to a blueprint provided by the White House.
In a video announcing the speech, Obama said he would lay out "a national plan to reduce carbon pollution, prepare our country for the impacts of climate change and lead global efforts to fight it."
Although "no single step" can reverse the existing effects of climate change, Obama said that "when it comes to the world we leave our children, we owe it to them to do what we can." He also will outline plans to prepare the nation for the impact of global warming and to seek new international agreements to address climate change on a global scale, the blueprint says.
Most of the climate change plan involves executive actions that don't require congressional approval. The president could have a difficult time getting his environmental agenda through Congress,  given a U.S. House run by Republicans and a Senate in which the GOP has enough members to mount effective filibusters.
Republicans and members of the energy industry are likely to criticize Obama's climate change plan, saying it will lead to higher utility bills and less development of reliable energy.
The president is not expected to discuss another major environmental issue in his speech: the proposed Keystone XL oil pipeline from Canada into the U.S., a project still under review by the State Department.
According to the White House blueprint, Obama will direct the Environmental Protection Agency to work with states, industry and other stakeholders to establish new carbon pollution standards for new and existing plants. He also plans to direct federal agencies to help state and local governments with existing problems caused by climate change -- such as improved flood protection for roads and other infrastructure, better hospitals to respond to increasingly powerful storms, and drought relief.
Calling for action on climate change in his State of the Union Address on Feb. 12, Obama said that "some may still deny the overwhelming judgment of science, but none can avoid the devastating impact of raging fires and crippling drought and more powerful storms."
As part of a global approach to climate change, Obama plans to call for an end of  federal support for public financing of new coal-fired plants overseas. Exceptions would be made "for the most efficient coal technology available in the world's poorest countries, or facilities deploying carbon capture and sequestration technologies," according to the blueprint. 



In full thrust over climate change; GOP pushes back on Obama's plan that may clog Keystone pipeline



President Obama said Tuesday that his State Department should not sign off on the Keystone XL oil pipeline if it increases greenhouse gas emissions.
"Our national interest will be served only if this project does not significantly exacerbate the problem of carbon pollution," Obama said during a major address on global warming at Georgetown University.
He made the statement on a warm day in Washington while outlining his new "climate action plan."
It  includes new rules to restrict what the president called "the limitless dumping" of carbon pollution from power plants, as well as the promotion of renewable energy sources and new energy-efficiency standards.
Obama said he would direct agencies to help brace the nation for existing effects of climate change, including hotter temperatures and stronger storms. He also pledged to seek new global agreements on climate change.
Warning that climate change threatens future generations, Obama told his college audience that "the question is not whether we need to act ... the question now is whether we will have the courage to act before it's too late."
In discussing efforts to reduce carbon pollution, Obama said he would direct the Interior Department to permit new wind, solar and other renewable energy projects on public lands, enough to power more than 6million homes by 2020.
Almost all of the president's plan involves executive actions that do not require congressional approval.
Republicans and members of the energy industry criticized Obama's climate change plan, saying it will lead to higher utility bills and less development of reliable energy.
The policies "will shutter power plants, destroy good-paying American jobs and raise electricity bills for families that can scarcely afford it," House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, said.
Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., said Obama's plan is a "war on coal" that translates to a "war on jobs."
Congressional Republicans are also major backers of the Keystone  pipeline, saying it will create jobs and increase the nation's energy supply. The project is being reviewed by the State Department because it crosses the U.S.-Canadian border.
Although Obama and aides said the State Department is making an independent judgment, Obama told the crowd at Georgetown that "the net effects of the pipeline's impact on our climate will be absolutely critical to determining whether this project is allowed to go forward."
Boehner spokesman Brendan Buck cited studies showing that the pipeline would not affect oil development in the Canadian tar sands and  would have little environmental effect. "The standard the president set today should lead to speedy approval of the Keystone pipeline," Buck said.
Obama  pledged to work with any willing Republicans but repeatedly criticized GOP members for ignoring or disputing the science behind climate change.
"We don't have time for a meeting of the Flat Earth Society," Obama said at one point.
Obama also disputed the Republican contention that environmental and climate regulations hurt the economy, saying they can actually encourage growth and innovation.
Environmental groups rallied around Obama's plan.
"Americans are already dealing with worse droughts, wildfires and coastal floods, and the practical realities of climate change are forcing political leaders to make this a priority," said Alden Meyer of the Union of Concerned Scientists. 



Obama should confront climate change fantasies



President Obama's new climate
policies outlined Tuesday include
both brilliant and useless ideas. The
confusion stems from his unwillingness
to confront three climate
fantasies:
uRenewables are a major part
of the solution today. No, they are
almost trivial. Today, the world gets
81% of its energy from fossil fuels. By
2035, in the most green scenario, we
will still get 79% from fossil fuels.
Wind and solar will increase from
0.8% to 3.2%  impressive, but not
what is going to matter.
uBiofuels should play a major
part of the solution. No. For now,
biofuels simply diverts food into cars,
driving up food prices and starvation,
while clearing forests for new fields
emit more CO2 than biofuels save.
uEfficiency can cut emissions.
No. Though efficiency is good, studies
show it has little climate impact
because its savings gets eaten up by
more use. As your car gets more efficient,
you drive it further, and the
money you still save get used for other
carbon-emitting activities.
But carefully implemented, Obama's
plan also shows the way to the
three climate truths.
Fracking is this decade's green solution.
Obama recognizes gas as a
"bridge fuel." Replacing dirtier coal,
cheaper gas from fracking has cut up
to 500 megatons of the U.S. CO2
emissions a year. This is about 10
times more than what renewables do,
and while renewables cost the U.S.
tens of billions of dollars, fracking
has saved the U.S. consumer $125 billion
annually in cheaper energy
prices. Fracking has local environmental
issues, but these can all be addressed
with good regulation.
Moving the U.S. fracking miracle to
the rest of the world will be the biggest
source of CO2 reductions this
decade, and simultaneously increase
global welfare by allowing energy access
to billions yet unserved.
Adaptation is smart, and Obama is
right to stress it. Wetlands, tidal barriers
and subway caps could have
dramatically reduced Hurricane
Sandy's impact, irrespective of how
little global warming impacted the
superstorm. There are many more
smart and cheap solutions to real
world problems.
Finally, we need innovation in
long-term green energy, which the
president wants to fund with $7.9
billion for fiscal 2014. As long as
green energy is much more expensive
than fossil fuels, it will always remain
a niche, subsidized by rich
countries to feel good. But if innovation
makes future green energy
sources cheaper than fossil fuels, everyone
will switch. Just like the 30-
year Energy Department research
into fracking made cleaner gas
cheaper than coal and produced a
historic U.S. CO2 reduction, twice
that of the European Union/Kyoto
reduction.
The final climate fantasy Obama
needs to confront is the idea that international
negotiations can somehow
bring about meaningful cuts.
We've tried this for more than 20
years and failed, and we will fail again
in 2015 in Paris. More than 180 countries
won't meaningfully reduce CO2
emissions from the fossil fuels that
power their economic growth.
The president should instead ask
the rest of the world to follow the U.S.
lead on green innovation. Economic
models show that this is by far the
best, long-term climate policy.
If we all invested far more to innovate
down the cost of future green
energy, we could out-compete fossil
fuels faster and truly solve global
warming.
Bjrn Lomborg is the author of The
Skeptical Environmentalist and director
of the Copenhagen Consensus
Center. 



Focus on jobs, not regulations



Cloaked in promises for a brighter future, the president's speech is simply more of the same. Americans have already rejected the president's global warming agenda and new energy taxes, which will cost the economy $400 billion a year. However, now that the president has been re-elected, he feels free to pursue the regulations he was afraid to impose before his last election day.
The president is well aware these new regulations will extend beyond power plants -- hitting every school, hospital and apartment building in America, causing energy prices to skyrocket and threatening any chance of the economic recovery we need.
Instead of forcing these costly regulations on a recovering economy and promising it will all work out in the end, he should embrace affordable energy and technologies that allow us to use our abundant resources efficiently, cleanly and cheaply while maintaining fuel diversity and reliability.
Recent advances in hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling in oil and natural gas have caused booming energy production in recent years. Oil production is up 40%. Natural gas production is up 16%. Low energy prices are fueling a manufacturing renaissance, and for the first time in decades, firms are looking to move production back to the United States.
If the president wants to gain the support of Americans on an energy policy, he should stop making excuses, finally approve the Keystone XL pipeline, and stop his obsession to increase taxes on energy producers, which only threatens jobs.
Although the president wants to expand renewable energy development on federal lands, his policies and the new regulations coming from his administration continue to keep the vast majority of federal lands off limits to oil and natural gas production.
The president proposes independent action to combat global warming, but his own former EPA administrator confirmed that "U.S. action alone will not impact world CO2 levels," and will only discourage companies from moving production back to the United States, leaving that production in countries where the same regulations do not exist.
The American people have consistently spoken that this Congress' and administration's principal focus should be on economic recovery. The future laid out by the president is one of economic stagnation, high unemployment, and an uncompetitive and uncertain economy. We need jobs, not more fanciful posturing and politics.
Sen. Jim Inhofe, R-Okla., is the senior member of the Environment and Public Works Committee. 



In an era of extreme weather, inaction is a bad bet


Scientists say that no particular extreme weather event can be blamed on climate change, but global warming "loads the dice" by making such events more likely.
So is it coincidence that Talkeetna, in interior Alaska, hit a record 96 degrees last week? Or that Las Vegas could break its all-time high of 117 degrees this weekend?
No one knows for sure, but this much is indisputable: The climate is changing. New high temperature records are far outstripping record lows. And, as President Obama spelled out in his climate plan this week, it's long past time to stop gambling with the planet's future.
Ideally, Obama and Congress would work together to address the threat by putting a price on climate-altering carbon pollution. But since that's as likely as a July 4 Washington blizzard, Obama's approach represents the next best option.
Obama's plan builds on one of the most unnoticed trends in the United States over the past several years: the drop in carbon emissions. From levels of 2005, they are down roughly 12%. This drop is not enough to meet the goal of 17% by 2020 that the president set four years ago. It is also being offset by increases elsewhere in the world. And some of it is the result of a weak economy.
But the drop does point the way forward. Much of the decline was driven by cheap and relatively clean natural gas, which power producers have been switching into in place of coal. Not surprisingly, coal-fired plants are at the heart of Obama's plan. Leaving much to the Environmental Protection Agency, he would put limits on carbon emissions for new and existing plants, a move that would inevitably hasten the shift away from coal.
This isn't popular in places such as West Virginia. And it might not be exactly what some environmentalists want to hear, because most of the replacement for coal is likely to be natural gas from fracking, and not renewables such as wind and solar, which are almost sure to remain niche energy sources for some time.
But the time for delicately dancing around the subject of coal's contribution to climate change is over. The highly polluting fuel is the low hanging fruit in any plan to combat climate change. It produces about twice as much carbon dioxide per unit of energy  as natural gas (and massively more than nuclear, wind and solar).
Critics focus on higher utility prices from new regulations on coal plants, but they ignore the enormous costs of rising oceans and hotter, more turbulent weather. New York City alone has already proposed $20billion in flood walls and storm barriers to gird itself against a changing climate.
The most challenging part of any climate change plan, of course, is not in replacing coal or shoring up defenses against rising sea levels. Rather, it is getting the rest of the world -- particularly  China and India -- to commit to meaningful greenhouse-gas reductions.
That's as much a diplomatic challenge as a scientific one. But unless the United States leads, others will be slow to follow, and the earth's outlook will remain a crapshoot. 



Time to switch to green' power


After President Obama laid out his plan to address climate change, we asked our Twitter followers: What should be done about the environment?
How about a plan to cut oil use in half? We can do it with today's technology  and smart policy.
@UCSRachel
Climate change can be fought with carbon tax on fossil fuels plus offset with income tax. It's simple. GOP Congress won't consider it.
@jamespettit4
Go green.  Turn AC off. Open windows. Use clothes lines to dry laundry instead of a dryer.
@Hplage44
We need to switch to green energy as fast as we can: natural gas, solar, wind and nuclear energy. Kill out coal and oil.
@sparta776
For more of this discussion, follow @USATOpinion or #tellusatoday on Twitter. 



Take more than one path to address climate change


FACEBOOK
President Obama unveiled a new plan to address climate change,  seeking new global agreements and taking measures to reduce carbon pollution at home.
Many are going to lose their jobs because of President Obama's plan. We aren't a bad polluter now compared with what we used to be. Plus, we are nothing in comparison with the newly industrialized countries. This plan is just the president's continued desire for more government regulation.
Obama is detrimental to this country's future.
Andrew Goetz
Coal and oil have ruined our rivers for a long time. Now our beautiful mountains in West Virginia are about gone to provide energy to keep the lights on.
Gary Allen
It may be me, but wouldn't it seem logical to assist coal companies with a phase-out and phase-in policy of old to new technologies?  A coal company is going to reject anything that threatens its livelihood.  Compromise is the key to a legacy, not mandates.
Edward W Greenlee
Great idea: Replace coal with natural gas. Natural gas is, of course, the result of "fracking."
Next speech for Obama: pandering to the anti-fracking crowd.
Henk Vandenbergh
LETTERS
Millions of Americans who work in clean energy-related businesses would take issue with Bjorn Lomborg's claim that clean energy has a marginal role in addressing climate change  ("Obama should confront climate change fantasies," Opinion, Wednesday).
Renewable energy production has doubled in the last four years. Some states now get 20% of their electricity from renewables. Yet the U.S. is still catching up to other countries, such as Lomborg's native Denmark, which gets 40% of its electricity from renewables.
Recent U.S. efficiency standards for everything from refrigerators to industrial motors  will help cut carbon pollution by 100 million metric tons by 2035 and save Americans $77 billion on energy bills, while driving innovation and economic growth. It's no fantasy. Renewable energy is making a difference.
Dale Bryk, director; energy and transportation program; Natural Resources Defense Council
New York 


Obama group targets energy; Non-profit helps push White House's climate-change plan



As President Obama pushes an aggressive national climate-change plan, his administration's non-profit advocacy arm is becoming active in clean-energy drives across the country.
Organizing for Action (OFA) also has formed a partnership that steers its volunteers to purchase wind and solar power from a single company with ties to liberal groups.
"While we are doing all of this work to advance the president's agenda in Congress, we also want to do everything we can locally to help switch to clean energy," said Ivan Frishberg, Organizing for Action's climate-change manager.
Organizing for Action, for instance, will recommend that its volunteers and activists who want to purchase renewable energy for their homes and businesses consider signing up with Ethical Electric, a firm that currently sells wind power in four Mid-Atlantic states and the District of Columbia and bills itself as a socially responsible energy supplier. It also has licenses that will allow it to expand to New York, Massachusetts, Illinois and Ohio.
Organizing for Action's leaders "are trying to show people that it's easy to make a change," said Tom Matzzie, the president of Ethical Electric and a former Washington director of the liberal group MoveOn.org Political Action. "It's an important role they can play in mobilizing people to participate in the clean-energy economy."
Organizing for Action officials say the group is not accepting  money from Ethical Electric. Instead, Matzzie said, OFA is directing the sign-up bonus that Ethical Electric offers to all new partners to another nonprofit -- Community Power Network -- which helps schools, neighborhood groups and other local organizations push for renewable energy.
Meredith McGehee, who examines government ethics at the Campaign Legal Center watchdog group, questions whether it's appropriate for an organization so closely linked to a sitting president to develop ties with one business.
"You can say that developing clean energy is great, but do competitors feel the weight of the presidency being used to undermine their business model?" she said. "It raises questions about the ethical propriety of the use of the president's bully pulpit."
Organizing for Action has no real precedent in American politics. The non-profit, run by former campaign and White House aides, has the goal of mobilizing Obama's legions of 2012 campaign volunteers to advance the president's second-term agenda on immigration, gun control, climate change and other issues.
OFA counts 2.6 million people as having taken at least one action on behalf of the president's agenda this year -- ranging from attending a rally to promoting  immigration changes  in Congress to making a financial contribution. The group, which can raise unlimited amounts of money, collected nearly $5 million during the first three months of the year.
The group's energy activism comes as the White House tries to sell a sweeping climate-change plan that circumvents Congress after failing to get lawmakers to pass legislation that curbs the greenhouse gas emissions blamed for global warming.
Under the plan unveiled last week, Obama is using his executive powers to impose new limits on carbon-dioxide emissions by new and existing power plants. The plan also increases energy-efficiency standards and boosts the production of renewable energy on federal land.
Environmental groups largely applauded the move, while Republicans and some Democrats  say the action  is another sign of what they call the president's "war on coal."
Two months ago, OFA took aim at lawmakers who disagree with the president, launching a "climate deniers" website that singles out more than 100 members of Congress.
At the local level, the group has paired with environmental groups in Northern California and in Illinois to encourage county and city governments to add more renewable energy to the available  electricity options.
Next week, for instance, OFA volunteers plan to help urge the Santa Rosa City Council, north of San Francisco, to vote to join Sonoma Clean Power, a new public agency with the power to purchase renewable energy from electricity suppliers. Sonoma County officials and two cities within the county already have opted in to the new agency, which would displace Pacific Gas and Electric as the main electricity provider. Pacific Gas and Electric still would distribute the electricity and handle billing. 



More hurricanes on horizon; Study links storms to climate change; critics say it's not 'last word'



The world could see as many as 20 additional hurricanes and tropical storms each year by the end of the century because of climate change, a study out Monday says.
The study,  published  in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS),  was written by  climate researcher Kerry Emanuel of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
On average,  about 90 tropical cyclones form each year, Emanuel says. (The term "tropical cyclone"  encompasses hurricanes, typhoons and cyclones, which are all the same type of storm with  different labels depending on where they form.)
One of the biggest debates in the climate change research community in recent years has been whether global warming will make hurricanes stronger, more frequent or longer.
Emanuel  used six newly upgraded global climate computer models to  determine that these killer storms will not only increase in intensity, as many previous studies had predicted, but will also increase in frequency in most locations.
"Our study suggests that the largest increases might occur in the western North Pacific region, but with noticeable increases in the South Indian Ocean and in the North Atlantic region," he says.
Most hurricanes that affect the USA form in the Atlantic Ocean.
"It is important to emphasize that most studies suggest that the frequency of the highest category tropical cyclones (those of Category 3, with winds of 111 mph and higher) should increase as the globe warms," Emanuel says. "There is less agreement about the frequency of the weakest category of storms."
The study didn't determine a cause,  Emanuel says, "but we suspect that the projected decrease in man-made aerosol particles may be at least partly responsible."
Aerosol particles from pollution can act to cool the globe, counteracting  climate change. However, Emanuel says, "I am not advocating going back to aerosol pollution!"
Georgia Tech climatologist Judith Curry, who was not part of the study, says the  conclusions come with "substantial uncertainties," since they rely on a large number of assumptions that have limited support.  "Personally, I take studies that project future tropical cyclone activity from climate models with a grain of salt."
Roger Pielke, a professor of environmental studies at the University of Colorado, who was also not part of the PNAS study, says  his own research  suggests that the ability to detect any signal of human-caused climate change on the impacts of hurricanes  will take many decades, and maybe centuries.
He says the increases predicted in Emanuel's study are projected over a century into the future. However, "over the past century, no such increase in frequency or intensity has been observed (in the U.S. or globally)."
"It is important to recognize that this study adds one stone to a bigger pile. It won't be the last word. No study is," he says. 



More hurricanes on the horizon; Study links storms to climate change; critics say it's not 'last word'



The world could see as many as 20 additional hurricanes and tropical storms each year by the end of the century because of climate change, a study out Monday says.
The study,  published  in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS),  was written by  climate researcher Kerry Emanuel of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
On average,  about 90 tropical cyclones form each year, Emanuel says. (The term "tropical cyclone"  encompasses hurricanes, typhoons and cyclones, which are all the same type of storm with  different labels depending on where they form.)
One of the biggest debates in the climate change research community in recent years has been whether global warming will make hurricanes stronger, more frequent or longer.
Emanuel  used six newly upgraded global climate computer models to  determine that these killer storms will not only increase in intensity, as many previous studies had predicted, but will also increase in frequency in most locations.
"Our study suggests that the largest increases might occur in the western North Pacific region, but with noticeable increases in the South Indian Ocean and in the North Atlantic region," he says.
Most hurricanes that affect the USA form in the Atlantic Ocean.
"It is important to emphasize that most studies suggest that the frequency of the highest category tropical cyclones (those of Category 3, with winds of 111 mph and higher) should increase as the globe warms," Emanuel says. "There is less agreement about the frequency of the weakest category of storms."
The study didn't determine a cause,  Emanuel says, "but we suspect that the projected decrease in man-made aerosol particles may be at least partly responsible."
Aerosol particles from pollution can act to cool the globe, counteracting  climate change. However, Emanuel says, "I am not advocating going back to aerosol pollution!"
Georgia Tech climatologist Judith Curry, who was not part of the study, says the  conclusions come with "substantial uncertainties," since they rely on a large number of assumptions that have limited support.  "Personally, I take studies that project future tropical cyclone activity from climate models with a grain of salt."
Roger Pielke, a professor of environmental studies at the University of Colorado, who was also not part of the PNAS study, says  his own research  suggests that the ability to detect any signal of human-caused climate change on the impacts of hurricanes  will take many decades, and maybe centuries.
He says the increases predicted in Emanuel's study are projected over a century into the future. However, "over the past century, no such increase in frequency or intensity has been observed (in the U.S. or globally)."
"It is important to recognize that this study adds one stone to a bigger pile. It won't be the last word. No study is," he says. 



High and dry in Texas; Water fights (and not the fun kind) are plaguing the Lone Star State as climate change raises the heat -- and the stakes.



In this browning patch of land in central Texas, C.J. Teare could be fined for using fresh water to keep her decades-old oak trees alive, so she relies on soapy water left over from washing clothes.
"I've never seen it like this before," says Teare, a grandmother who has lived in her modest Lakeside Beach ranch for 20 years. Her community has been under emergency water restrictions since January 2012, when it became the first to run dry during Texas' ongoing three-year drought. It stays afloat with six daily truckloads of water.
Thirty miles southeast near Austin, Pete Clark had to close one restaurant along Lake Travis, and the other has lost 75% of its business since 2011. Water levels are so low that Carlos n' Charlie's, once a popular floating Tex-Mex watering hole, is no longer even lakeside.
An hour upstream along Lake Buchanan, Rusty Brandon is filing for bankruptcy. He says potential customers say "never mind" when he tells them there's no water for boating or fishing at his Hi-Line Lake Resort. Whatever its cause, he says, "I'm literally on the front line of experiencing climate change daily."
These are the faces of drought in the Lone Star State, where water has become such a Texas-size problem that some desperate residents do rain dances while others hope for tropical storms.
 traveled to the Austin area, where nightly city patrols issue fines to residents who violate water restrictions, as the fifth stop in a year-long series to explore places where climate change is changing lives.
Though drought has several causes, climate scientists say global warming is a long-term contributor that could be exacerbating conditions, especially in the already-arid Southwest. They say it will probably do more damage. Why? Higher temperatures cause more water to evaporate, and unless there's enough rain to offset that, the ground dries up.
More heat is on the way, too. U.S. temperatures are expected to rise 3 to 10 degrees by 2100, partly because of the heat-trapping greenhouse gases emitted in the burning of fossil fuels, according to a draft copy of the third National Climate Assessment, a federal report compiled by hundreds of government and academic scientists. As a result, the report expects summer droughts to intensify in most U.S. regions as well as enduring water shortages in the Southwest, Southeast and Hawaii.
Drought, which struck as much as two-thirds of the land in the lower 48 contiguous states last year, still afflicts 44% of that area and 87% of Texas, the U.S. Drought Monitor reports. The National Weather Service predicts it will persist or intensify in much of the western USA, including the western half of Texas where drought caused billions of dollars in damage in 2011 from crop failures, herd die-offs and wildfires.
"Climate change is likely prolonging the duration and severity of naturally occurring drought in the Southwest," says Martin Hoerling, a research meteorologist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. He says the main cause of U.S. drought is a lack of rainfall, but by century's end, the key culprit might be higher temperatures.
Texas, prone to drought, is particularly vulnerable. Its supply of water is shrinking while its demand for water is rising amid a boom in population and fossil fuel production. In hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, huge amounts of water are blasted underground to break apart rock and retrieve oil or gas trapped inside.
Tiffs over fracking
Conflicts are flaring between frackers, who are giving what landowners call "mailbox money" for the right to tap their water wells, and residents whose wells are running dry. Tiffs have arisen even within families, as some take the money and others don't. Much of Texas fracking is done in the northern Barnett Shale near Fort Worth and the southern Eagle Ford Shale.
In the Austin area, where fracking isn't an issue, lawsuits have been filed over water distribution as business owners upstream compete with rice farmers downstream.
"This drought has affected everyone, up and down the basin," says Ryan Rowney of the Lower Colorado River Authority, a quasi-state agency that runs local water systems.
Last year and again this spring, the LCRA cut off water to most rice farmers because reservoir levels reached record lows in Lakes Travis and Buchanan. Rowney says levels are "rivaling those of the 1950s drought -- the drought of record," a seven-year dry spell that caused agricultural and other losses estimated at $22 billion.
"Things are likely to get worse," says Robert Mace, who directs water science and conservation at the Texas Water Development Board. Statewide, he says, reservoir levels are at their lowest since at least 1990. By year's end, 29 Texas communities could follow Spicewood Beach and adjacent Lakeside Beach in running out of water, according to the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, a state agency.
That's left many wondering what the future holds as temperatures rise.
"I'm not a firm believer that men are a source of climate change," says Brandon, who's laid off all workers at his deserted "lake" resort. Still, whatever its cause, he sees its impact:
The link between climate change and drought is complicated. Drought has multiple causes that include year-to-year climate patterns such as La Nia and decadal shifts in ocean temperatures. Climate scientists say it remains a challenge, despite improved computer models, to figure out what portion of drought can be attributed to global warming.
"This is not quite like rocket science," Hoerling says, adding that climate modeling is more "interpretive."
He co-authored a report, released in April, that says global warming played little, if any, role in last year's historic drought in the central Great Plains. He says the main cause was a lack of moisture that usually sweeps up from the Gulf of Mexico.
Other climate scientists, acknowledging the role of these weather patterns and natural variability, say climate change exacerbated the 2012 drought partly by helping to keep the jet stream north.
"All these three factors combine to contribute to the dry conditions in Texas and elsewhere in the Southwest," says Gerald Meehl, senior scientist at the National Center for Atmospheric Research, a federally funded laboratory.
Despite year-to-year fluctuations in these areas, he says, "you have this long-term trend toward dryness."
Global warming, by raising temperatures, made the 2011 Texas drought "distinctly more probable" than would have occurred 40 to 50 years ago, says a study led by David Rupp and Philip Mote of Oregon State University.
Another study, co-authored by Hoerling and Texas' state climatologist, Texas A&M professor John Nielsen-Gammon, says this warming made the drought slightly worse. The researchers say it didn't affect precipitation but accounted for about 20%, or 1 degree, of the 5-degree jump in temperature above the summer norm.
What's straining the supply
What's exacerbating water worries in parts of Texas is water-intensive fracking, which is taking off in some of the state's driest areas.
Fifty-one percent of Texas' oil and gas wells were in "high or extremely high water stress" regions, according to a report in May by Ceres, a Boston-based non-profit group that promotes corporate sustainability. Nationwide, the report says, 47% of these wells are in water-stressed areas.
In Texas, water for fracking jumped 125% in three years -- from 36,000 acre-feet in 2008 to about 81,500 in 2011 -- and will continue to increase before leveling off in the 2020s, according to a University of Texas-Austin study this year by research scientist Jean-Phillippe Nicot.
The UT study says oil and gas drilling accounts for less than 1% of water use statewide. But a similar 2011 study, also by Nicot, found it accounts for at least 20% of water in some counties where fracking is big.
Hugh Fitzsimons, a Dimmit County bison rancher, suspects fracking has depleted nearby wells so much that one of his wells is running low. "I've had trouble irrigating," says Fitzsimons, whose herd has dropped from 400 in 2007 to 100.
Further east, the water-intensive process of rice farming has also generated concern.
Bob Reed, who has grown rice in Bay City since 1980, says he has been unable to plant because rice farmers were cut off from municipal water supplies the past two years.
"You can't do it without irrigation," he says, adding his land is ideally suited to rice -- not other crops.
He and other rice farmers got federal crop insurance, which Reed says covered about a third of his losses.
Mike Burnside, 65, who has grown rice on 1,000 acres in Bay City, says it's risky to buy equipment and switch to row crops such as corn, milo or soybean, because they're dependent on rain.
"I'll continue to farm," he says. "It's a calling. I'll probably die on the farm, until my wheels don't work anymore."
Clark hopes for a storm. In his 26 years of doing business along Lake Travis, nearly 56 feet below capacity,  he's seen other droughts -- and floods -- but never anything this bad.
"Droughts are a slow, painful death," Clark says, noting he might be forced to close Carlos n' Charlie's. He tries to remain optimistic, recalling how the lake once rose 36 feet in 24 hours during a storm.
"It is possible," Clark says. "That's why we stay in business, because technically it (drought) shouldn't last forever." 



Water worries grow in desert Southwest; Heat waves, wildfires also big concerns



phoenix The canal, its blue water sparkling in the morning Arizona sunshine, has been there in some form for more than a thousand years.
More than 10 centuries ago, Native Americans dug canals to bring water -- the desert's most precious resource -- into their farms and communities in the harsh climate of what's now Phoenix.
Today, the 56 million Americans in the fast-growing desert Southwest -- including  the megacities of Phoenix, Los Angeles, Las Vegas and San Diego -- are faced with a challenge beyond the region's natural dryness: coping with an uncertain future of man-made climate change and how it will impact their life-sustaining supply of water.
Although worries about water lead the list of climate change concerns in the Southwest, other issues, such as extreme heat waves and furious wildfires, are also high on the list.
"Water is our biggest issue," says state climatologist Nancy Selover from her office at Arizona State University. In the desert, "you can never have enough water."
Arizona's capital city gets less rain each year than any other major U.S. city --  about 7.5 inches,  which is close to what Mobile, Ala., receives in an average July,  National Weather Service data show.
"Recent drought has been unusually severe, relative to the droughts of the last century," says a report released this year as part of the draft of the third federal National Climate Assessment.
The drought is "monumental," says Gregg Garfin, a climate scientist at the University of Arizona and one of the assessment editors.
Water flow in the Colorado River -- which supplies water to more than 30 million people in the Southwest, including Los Angeles, Phoenix and Las Vegas -- is declining, along with the spring snowpack in the mountains that feeds the river, because of increased warmth.
Temperatures in the Southwest are rising more quickly than in other regions of the nation as a result of climate change, according to a recent paper prepared by the White House. Arizona is the fastest-warming state in the nation, based on data from 1970 to 2011, warming at a rate of 0.6 degrees per decade, a Climate Central report found.
"I don't believe we can sustain the status quo" when it comes to water use and management in the Southwest, Garfin says.
Flying over the harsh but gorgeous desert landscape of Arizona in a helicopter in late May provides a bird's-eye view of the system in place to bring water to the thirsty people of Phoenix --  a massive series of reservoirs, dams and canals from the Salt and Verde Rivers.
"We've planned for drought and built for drought," says Charlie Ester, the manager of water resource operations for the Salt River Project, which supplies much of the water and energy for Phoenix.
Ester predicts that Phoenix "can get through any drought in the historical record."
Garfin says Phoenix's ability to deliver water successfully is due mainly to its three  sources of water: the Colorado River; the Salt and Verde Rivers and their reservoirs; and the city's underground water supply.
So even though the supply from the Colorado River might be dwindling, Garfin says Phoenix may very well be able to continue to deliver water in the decades to come.
Water management agencies note that  any new development must prove that there will be enough water for the residents for 100 years.
If not,  "then development won't get approved," says Kathleen Ferris, executive director of the Arizona Municipal Water Users Association. "There's no other state that's required to prove a 100-year water supply for new homes."
Are these measures enough? "They've got their eye on the ball in Phoenix and have made big changes in planning," Garfin says. "They've paid attention to the science and are taking it seriously.
"But do they really know what climate change will throw at them?" he asks. "What about abrupt change or a 50-year drought? Can they sustain water supply for the longest droughts that we've known in the Colorado River basin?"
Though Phoenix may be able to withstand a future with climate change because of its three water sources, other locations in the Southwest may not: Garfin says the most vulnerable areas for water in the Southwest are New Mexico, California, the Colorado Front Range and Las Vegas.
Extreme heat waves and devastating wildfires are likely to worsen in the Southwest because of climate change, according to the federal assessment.
The period since 1950 in the Southwest has been hotter than any comparably long period in at least 600 years, the federal draft assessment  says.
Wildfires will be a significant issue in the Southwest in the decades to come. "We're seeing that with the drought conditions and more warmth, there is more potential for wildfires," Selover says.
Though there may be a reduction in the number of blazes, the ones that do form are much larger, according to a report from the Arizona Department of Forestry. 



DOE: Climate change will disrupt energy supply; Power lines less efficient in higher temperatures



U.S. energy supplies will likely face more severe disruptions because of climate change and extreme weather, which have already caused blackouts and lowered production at power plants, a government report warned Thursday.
What's driving these vulnerabilities? Rising temperatures, up 1.5 degrees Fahrenheit in the last century, and the resulting sea level rise, which are accompanied by drought, heat waves, storms and wildfires, according to the U.S. Department of Energy.
"It (climate change) is a very serious problem, and it will get worse," says Jonathan Pershing, who oversaw the report's development. While impacts will vary by region, "no part of the country is immune," he says.
"Sea level rise made Sandy worse," intensifying flooding, Pershing says.  When the superstorm slammed the East Coast last year, it took down power lines, damaged power plants and left millions  in the dark.
The report comes one week after President Obama, describing climate change as a threat to future generations, called for action to address the problem "before it's too late." He said he aims to cut heat-trapping greenhouse gas emissions from new and existing power plants.
Echoing other research, the DOE report makes the case for why such reductions are needed. It says coastal power plants are at risk from sea level rise and power lines operate less efficiently in higher temperatures.
"The report accurately outlines the risks to the energy sector"  and should serve as a "wake-up call," says Jennifer Morgan, deputy director of climate and energy at the World Resources Institute, a non-profit that advocates for sustainability.
The report cites prior  disruptions. Last year in Connecticut, the Millstone Nuclear Power Station shut down one reactor because the temperature of water needed to cool the facility -  from the Long Island Sound - was too high. A similar problem caused power reductions in 2010 at  Hope Creek Nuclear Generating Station in New Jersey and  Limerick Generating Station in Pennsylvania.
Reduced snowpack in the Sierra Nevada mountains last year cut California's hydroelectric power generation by 8%, while drought caused the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to stop  transporting  oil and coal along the Mississippi River, where water levels were too low. In September 2010, water levels in Nevada's Lake Mead fell to a 54-year low, prompting a 23% loss in the Hoover Dam's generation.
While climate change is not the sole cause of drought,  scientists say rising temperatures can  cause more moisture to evaporate from the soil. They say those temperatures, which the third federal National Climate Assessment says could rise 3 to 10 degrees Fahrenheit by 2100, will contribute more to drought in the future.
In Texas, which is suffering a three-year drought that now affects 87% of its land, conflicts are arising over the water-intensive process of extracting oil or natural gas from shale deposits, known as hydraulic fracturing, or fracking. In 2011, Grand Prairie banned city water for fracking. Other municipalities have restricted water use for that purpose.
Nationwide, 47% of fracking wells are in water-stressed areas, says a report  by Ceres, a Boston non-profit.
The DOE report cites research indicating that nearly 60% of current thermoelectric power plants, which need water cooling to operate, are located in water-stressed areas.
It says higher temperatures will boost  demand for air conditioning, which could threaten energy security by forcing the nation's power system to operate beyond ranges for which it was designed. It cites a study by DOE's Argonne National Laboratory that found such peak demand, given current population levels, will require additional electricity equal to 100 new power plants.
The dire tone of the DOE report, while warranted, can "give a reader a sense of fatigue," says Joe Casola, a senior scientist at C2ES, formerly the Pew Center on Global Climate Change. Yet he says it also points to solutions, such as water-efficient technologies and protection for energy infrastructure.
"It's technologically within our means to address some of these issues now," Casola says. "There are a lot of things we can do."
Pershing agrees: "It's a problem we need to work on."  He says  the billions of dollars in losses already incurred from climate-related disasters show the need for additional measures. 



DOE: Climate change will disrupt energy supply; Power lines less efficient in higher temperatures



U.S. energy supplies will likely face more severe disruptions because of climate change and extreme weather, which have already caused blackouts and lowered production at power plants, a government report warned Thursday.
What's driving these vulnerabilities? Rising temperatures, up 1.5 degrees Fahrenheit in the last century, and the resulting sea level rise, which are accompanied by drought, heat waves, storms and wildfires, according to the U.S. Department of Energy.
"It (climate change) is a very serious problem, and it will get worse," says Jonathan Pershing, who oversaw the report's development. While impacts will vary by region, "no part of the country is immune," he says.
"Sea level rise made Sandy worse," intensifying flooding, Pershing says.  When the superstorm slammed the East Coast last year, it took down power lines, damaged power plants and left millions  in the dark.
The report comes one week after President Obama, describing climate change as a threat to future generations, called for action to address the problem "before it's too late." He said he aims to cut heat-trapping greenhouse gas emissions from new and existing power plants.
Echoing other research, the DOE report makes the case for why such reductions are needed. It says coastal power plants are at risk from sea level rise and power lines operate less efficiently in higher temperatures.
"The report accurately outlines the risks to the energy sector"  and should serve as a "wake-up call," says Jennifer Morgan, deputy director of climate and energy at the World Resources Institute, a non-profit that advocates for sustainability.
The report cites prior  disruptions. Last year in Connecticut, the Millstone Nuclear Power Station shut down one reactor because the temperature of water needed to cool the facility -  from the Long Island Sound - was too high. A similar problem caused power reductions in 2010 at  Hope Creek Nuclear Generating Station in New Jersey and  Limerick Generating Station in Pennsylvania.
Reduced snowpack in the Sierra Nevada mountains last year cut California's hydroelectric power generation by 8%, while drought caused the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to stop  transporting  oil and coal along the Mississippi River, where water levels were too low. In September 2010, water levels in Nevada's Lake Mead fell to a 54-year low, prompting a 23% loss in the Hoover Dam's generation.
While climate change is not the sole cause of drought,  scientists say rising temperatures can  cause more moisture to evaporate from the soil. They say those temperatures, which the third federal National Climate Assessment says could rise 3 to 10 degrees Fahrenheit by 2100, will contribute more to drought in the future.
In Texas, which is suffering a three-year drought that now affects 87% of its land, conflicts are arising over the water-intensive process of extracting oil or natural gas from shale deposits, known as hydraulic fracturing, or fracking. In 2011, Grand Prairie banned city water for fracking. Other municipalities have restricted water use for that purpose.
Nationwide, 47% of fracking wells are in water-stressed areas, says a report  by Ceres, a Boston non-profit.
The DOE report cites research indicating that nearly 60% of current thermoelectric power plants, which need water cooling to operate, are located in water-stressed areas.
It says higher temperatures will boost  demand for air conditioning, which could threaten energy security by forcing the nation's power system to operate beyond ranges for which it was designed. It cites a study by DOE's Argonne National Laboratory that found such peak demand, given current population levels, will require additional electricity equal to 100 new power plants.
The dire tone of the DOE report, while warranted, can "give a reader a sense of fatigue," says Joe Casola, a senior scientist at C2ES, formerly the Pew Center on Global Climate Change. Yet he says it also points to solutions, such as water-efficient technologies and protection for energy infrastructure.
"It's technologically within our means to address some of these issues now," Casola says. "There are a lot of things we can do."
Pershing agrees: "It's a problem we need to work on."  He says  the billions of dollars in losses already incurred from climate-related disasters show the need for additional measures. 



Dunes, reefs protect U.S. coasts from climate change; Study says habitats key



Rising sea levels and extreme weather put 16% of U.S. coastlines at "high hazard" risk and the number of threatened residents could double if natural habitats -- sand dunes, coral reefs, sea grasses, mangroves -- aren't protected, Stanford  researchers say in a study released Sunday.
The study, noting that 23 of the 25 most densely populated U.S. counties are coastal, comes as U.S. and local officials are looking at "hardening" shorelines with billion-dollar sea walls and other projects in the aftermath of Superstorm Sandy, which devastated the Mid-Atlantic coast last October. It says maintaining habitats may offer a simpler, cheaper alternative in some areas.
"If we lose these defenses, we will either have to have massive investments in engineered defenses or risk greater damage to millions of people and billions in property," says lead author and Stanford scientist Katie Arkema in announcing the findings, published in the journal Nature Climate Change. She says reefs and dunes play critical roles in places such as Hillsborough and Monroe counties in Florida and Brooklyn in New York.
To show where habitats offer the most protection, the researchers analyzed five federal scenarios for sea-level rise.
They found good and bad news. On the plus side, natural habitats now protect two-thirds or 67% of U.S. coastlines. But sea-level rise, a result of climate change's rising temperatures, will increase the number of threatened people 30% to 60% by the year 2100, the study found.
"This study is a pretty significant advance over what's been done before," says Virginia Matzek, a restoration ecologist at Santa Clara University in California. She says the findings are conservative, noting the authors assumed current storm frequency, although storms are expected to get more frequent.
Peter Kareiva, chief scientist at The Nature Conservancy and one of the study's co-authors, says it makes a difference whether marsh or reef is 10 feet or 100 feet offshore, arguing the federal government needs to invest in mapping coastal habitats.
"We have the human genome. What about the Earth genome?" he asks, saying habitats could reduce the need for costlier solutions and offer other benefits such as recreation, fish nurseries, water filtration and erosion control. "It costs a ton of money to build a sea wall, and a sea wall does one thing only. Habitats do many."
The study says the East and Gulf coasts are more vulnerable to sea-level rise than the West Coast. It says while habitats may protect some areas, "sea-level rise will overwhelm" them in others, so additional measures are needed. 



Study warns rising seas could swamp 1,400 cities



A rise in sea levels threatens the viability of more than 1,400 American cities and towns, including Miami, Virginia Beach and Jacksonville, unless there are deep cuts in heat-trapping greenhouse gas emissions, says an analysis  out Monday.
Prior emissions have already locked in 4 feet of future sea-level rise that will submerge parts of 316 municipalities, but the timing is unclear and could take hundreds of years, according to the paper in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. If global warming continues at its current rate through the year 2100, an additional 1,100 cities and towns will be mostly under water at high tide in the distant future.
"It's like this invisible threat," says author Benjamin Strauss, a scientist at Climate Central, a non-profit, non-advocacy research group based in Princeton, N.J., that's funded by foundations, individuals and federal grants. He says these sea levels are much higher than what's predicted this century -- typically 1 to 4 feet -- because climate change multiplies their impact over hundreds of years.
He says many people have the mistaken notion that if greenhouse gas emissions stop, the problem of sea levels rising will go away. It won't, he says, because carbon dioxide stays in the atmosphere for centuries -- even millenniums -- and contributes to two factors that raise sea levels: higher temperatures and the loss of Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets.
"The current trend in carbon emissions likely implies the eventual crippling or loss of most coastal cities in the world," Strauss writes.
To calculate U.S. cities at risk, he looked at elevation data and 2010 Census population figures. He blended that with a finding, published last month in a PNAS paper led by Anders Levermann of the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, that each degree Fahrenheit of global warming translates to 4.2 feet of sea-level rise in the long run (as much as two millenniums.)
"This is probably the most unique and novel way of talking about a longer time frame," says Peter Ruggiero, a coastal engineering scientist at Oregon State University. He says  most analyses look only at this century, but "the world doesn't end in 2100." Yet he says there are huge "uncertainties" projecting so far into the future, and the paper has "a bit of fuzziness" because its estimates on the number of people who could be affected assume no change in coastal population or land features. The estimates also do not account for potential engineering solutions.
Some climate scientists say the findings may be counterproductive. Looking at such a distant tomorrow "could scare people about something that might not happen for centuries," says Jayantha Obeysekera of the South Florida Water Management District, a regional government agency. He says long-term projections may not be helpful to U.S. planners focused on the next few decades.
Strauss' analysis says 3.6 million Americans live in the 316 municipalities -- including New Orleans, Atlantic City, Fort Lauderdale and Miami Beach -- that are already considered at risk, because half of their populations live below the future high-tide level that prior emissions have locked in.
Florida is the most vulnerable state by far, Strauss says, adding that Louisiana, New Jersey and North Carolina also face enormous difficulties. Unless major change occurs, he says, more than 100 cities in each of these states could be threatened.
Strauss says tragedy can be avoided or mitigated with deep global pollution cuts followed by technology that sucks CO2 from the atmosphere. Such bold steps, he says, could help preserve hundreds of coastal communities. 



This will only get worse; Louisiana is shrinking as climate change softens up the already-vulnerable Gulf Coast



Pelicans and pickups roam the beach, where the waves roll in and return, lapping over the open water of the Gulf of Mexico.
The water covers land that was once beach, and it has devoured land that was once marsh tucked behind this 6-square-mile barrier island, a speed bump for hurricanes headed north from the Gulf.
On this sunny day, the Tarpon Rodeo -- billed as "the oldest fishing tournament in the United States!" -- is underway, with fishing boats and truck-bed hot tubs competing in nearly equal numbers on the road. But beneath the sunshine here on the edge of this vanishing wetland, human mistakes are adding up.
Indeed, the in-your-face transformation -- a product of climate change and the rewiring of the Mississippi -- is threatening the spawning grounds for much of the nation's seafood, the pit stop for the Gulf's oil industry and the home of the beloved bayous and fishing "camps" that make life here unlike anywhere else. With every bit of wetlands lost -- each day a football field's worth -- the people and places of the Gulf Coast become that much more vulnerable to the next hurricane.
"I revel in every moment I'm out on the beaches, the bayous, the ponds," says Al Duvernay, 61, a life-long Louisianan. A retired oil industry worker, Duvernay now volunteers for efforts to rebuild the land sinking under the waves, a retreat he has seen firsthand over the course of a lifetime spent on the Mississippi River Delta. "Another part of me is compelled to come back here, because I know it is all going away."
In the past eight decades, Louisiana has lost 1,880 square miles of coastal marshes, or an area about the size of Manhattan every year. With another hurricane season upon us, it is land that Louisiana and the nation can ill afford to lose. The same threat of lost barrier islands and wetlands stalks more than half of the coastal properties of the continental United States, extending from Maine to Texas. But here in southeastern Louisiana, it's at its worst.
 traveled to this place where the Mississippi meets the Gulf of Mexico as the sixth stop in a year-long series to explore places where climate change is changing lives.
"The sea is rising and the land is sinking," says Louisiana's state climatologist, Barry Keim, based at Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge. "The two together mean that wetlands are disappearing here at unprecedented rates worldwide." Add in the threat of more powerful hurricanes spurred by climate change, Keim says, "and you have to worry about the past repeating itself here."
"Louisiana is in many ways, one of the best examples of starting to see some of the near-term implications of climate change," says environmental policy expert Jordan Fischbach, of the Pardee RAND Graduate School in Pittsburgh, part of the team that last year developed tools for the state to decide what coastal restoration projects to pursue. "In some ways, I feel like it is the canary in the coal mine because they are seeing effects that change people's day-to-day lives."
Cemeteries are sinking and washing away in towns like Leeville, La., on their way to becoming isolated spits of land. Onetime orange groves and cotton fields are waterlogged.
Change here is constant but not subtle, so authorities have embarked on ambitious projects to, actually and figuratively, turn the tide. In May, the Louisiana Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority (CPRA) announced 39 projects it hoped to see reverse the damage, part of a 50-year, $50 billion plan. They range from restoring marshes to spilling fresh river water into the delta to rebuilding barrier islands.
Every 3 miles of wetlands restored means 1 foot less of  storm surge, the water wall pushed ahead of storm winds that is often one of the biggest killers in a hurricane, Keim says. "I worry a 50-year plan isn't enough, that it won't be enough," he says. "If we were talking about a 500-year plan, or a 1,000-year plan, that might be enough to bring things back."
The storm surge in Hurricane Katrina reached a record 25 to 28 feet, where it hit hardest in Mississippi. It killed 1,200 people and caused $75billion in damages, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
"Once you go through something like Katrina, you are never the same," says Duvernay, who spent the day after the storm in his fishing boat rescuing his neighbors, trapped in the upper floors of drowned homes. "You never want to see that again."
MISSISSIPPI MISTAKE
Driving along Louisiana State Highway 1, more a bridge than a road from New Orleans to Grand Isle, Hilary Collis of the Coalition to Restore Coastal Louisiana looks across wide-open lakes and estuaries, a few slivers of sand and mud dotted with marsh grass and short, squat mangrove trees. She then points to what isn't there anymore.
"All the open water you are seeing was once wetlands," Collis says. "Just a few millimeters at a time it sank, and now it's gone." Unlike the vanished cypress trees that once dotted the marsh lining the bayou that parallels the highway, the mangroves have migrated from farther south, thriving in today's brackish water and warmer temperatures.
How did it happen? For one thing, the Mississippi River has stopped doing its job: building wetlands. A massive levee program beginning in 1927 rerouted the Mississippi and put it "in a straitjacket," Keim says, kept its freshwater and mud from spreading across the Mississippi River Delta and replenishing the marshes. So without the silt, the marshes started to sink.
"They turned off the sand and mud machine that built up the wetlands," is how Duvernay puts it.
At the same time, the sea has risen about 7 inches globally in the past century, driven by climate change, alongside an increase of Earth's average surface temperature of more than 1.4 degrees. The increase is largely due to heat-trapping carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases, emitted into the air by burning coal, oil and other fossil fuels, boosting temperatures, according to the U.S. National Academy of Sciences. On the world's coasts, the result has been a change from the past 1,900 years of stability, as a warmer ocean expands and warmer air melts glaciers, leading to higher seas.
Along Louisiana Highway 1, which carries travelers the last 60 miles from Lockport, La., to Grand Isle, the results are clear. Dead cypress trees killed by saltwater still stand in isolated spots, ringing ponds that have become brackish lakes.
"I watched it all happen, places where I could fish and camp as a child are now just open water," Duvernay says.
Keim, also a Louisiana native, sheepishly admits that he grew up as a child thinking that cypress trees just looked that way, dead. "It took a little education to figure out that the intrusion of saltwater had killed them all in the years before I was born," he says.
Louisiana 1 is also the only road to Port Fourchon, the southernmost port in Louisiana, which supports 90% of the nation's offshore oil and gas rigs. Vulnerable to flooding, the highway is the key to 18% of the nation's oil production, according to January's draft of the federal National Climate Assessment report. "Every time there is a high tide or any storm, that road goes out," Fischbach says.
And one final problem: Four major hurricanes -- Katrina (2005), Rita (2005), Gustav (2008) and Ike (2011) -- have battered the region since 2005. Eroded, inundated, cut up by oil company canals and even gnawed to the roots by invasive South American rodents called nutria ("They eat marshland in its entirety," Keim says), the wetlands' ability to halt these goliaths' storm surges has been undermined.
The same warming ocean waters that are slowly rising also look likely to deliver more powerful hurricanes to these shores. A 2010 Nature Geosciences study led by Thomas Knutson of NOAA's Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory in Princeton, N.J., concluded that future storms would be as much as 11% more intense in this century, dropping about 20% more rain within 60 miles of their center.
On the plus side, global warming might mean that fewer storms form -- as many as 34% fewer -- in the years ahead. So we might see fewer, meaner storms, across the planet. Though the frequency question is one of the many unsettled areas of climate science, as some experts such as MIT's Kerry Emanuel predict a proliferation of storms with these warmer conditions.
The debate matters not, Keim says.
"We don't need to know the answer to look at the data and know that hurricanes have hit the Gulf Coast hard in the past," Keim says. "And the numbers tell us that where something has happened in the past, it will happen again."
WHAT CAN BE DONE?
Once a stomping ground of the pirate Jean Lafitte, Isle Grand Terre is a patch of sandy scrub curving before the Gulf of Mexico next to Grand Isle, a barrier island that shelters salty lagoons, marshes and bayous from the open sea. The island is home to five abandoned scientific buildings, the ruins of a Confederate fortress and mosquitoes that swarm visitors. It's also the home of a dune rebuilding project sponsored by local brewer Abita, which Al Duvernay volunteered for earlier this year. He and other helpers were brought in by barge in shifts to plant the dunes.
"This is success," says Collis, pointing to a strip of dune grass stalks that extends several hundred yards along a newly installed beach fence, set about 40 yards back from the surf. Sand has already started to pile up against the fence, burying slats 2 inches deep, the start of a new dune guarding the beach. Volunteers had planted 18,000 stalks in the sand over two days in March, and now they stood erect, their roots bidding to become another bulwark against a future storm.
"The idea is the dune and the dune grasses grow together, becoming larger and larger," Collis says. "If someday a hurricane comes and digs it all up then at least it will have done its job of taking some energy out of the storm."
Even so, volunteer projects -- planting grasses on dunes, or mangroves in lagoons -- go only so far. The state coastal authority's industrial-scale projects are now beginning after more than two decades of planning, arguing and voting. They received overwhelming support last year from the state Legislature. Interestingly, the state's plan doesn't mention climate change; it just assumes it will happen. The estimated rise in sea levels form the backdrop against which projects are picked for priority.
At Port Fourchon, just a few miles down from Grand Isle on the oft-flooded Louisiana 1, for example, a $5.4 million "Geotube" project now underway is stuffing 6-feet-wide fabric tubes with sand nearly a mile down the beach.
But not everything is proceeding seamlessly. The fight over the coastal restoration plan has inevitably headed to the courts. Some oyster farmers are suing the state's coastal restoration project for Mississippi freshwater diversions that could harm oyster beds. The goal of the diversion is to restore delta-building sediment to sinking parts of the region and counter the saltwater creeping ever farther inland.
The state's levee authority last month sued oil and gas companies for decades of cutting canals willy-nilly through wetlands and letting saltwater in from the Gulf. Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, a Republican, is disputing the levee authority's right to file the lawsuit.
CROWDING THE COASTS
Yet the legal issues often fold into the environmental ones, and those concerns lead to another place of concern along the U.S. coastlines: overdevelopment. About 39% of the U.S. population (works out to about 123 million people) now live in shoreline counties, according to Census data. The deluxe camps on Grand Isle -- seemingly almost daring the next hurricane's wrath -- are just one symptom of this rush to the coast
"Global warming doesn't make people buy beachfront condos," Keim says, pointing to another piece of the hurricane dilemma.
A quiet period for hurricanes that ended in the 1990s lured the nation toward beach living, sparking a coastal construction boom that is still underway. From Louisiana's camps and vacation homes perched high on stilt-like piers, to New Jersey's shore towns, Americans still can't get enough of warm waves and soft sand and are often undaunted by the dangers building on our coasts.
Those who are taking up this fight, though, see a silver lining in these dark clouds.
"I am happier than I have been in a long time that some places will be saved," Duvernay says.
He cites not his own volunteer efforts, or his fishing habit, but the realization that officials are starting to pay attention to this changing world.
"I'm happier there is a plan with some funding," Duvernay says, "but I still worry it might be too little, too late."
Catch up with 's year-long series examining how climate change is affecting Americans' everyday lives online at: climatechange.usatoday.com 




Sturdier buildings urged after Sandy; Task force lays out guidelines for spending $50.5B in hurricane aid



A special task force created after Superstorm Sandy recommends that new construction be built to withstand the force of increasingly dangerous storms, a deadly consequence of climate change.
The Hurricane Sandy Rebuilding Task Force also urged hardening of existing infrastructure to ward off power failures and fuel shortages, and to maintain cellular service during future disasters.
"More than ever, it is critical that when we build for the future, we do so in a way that makes communities more resilient to emerging challenges such as rising sea levels, extreme heat, and more frequent and intense storms," the report said.
Elected officials and private groups welcomed the report, which laid out guidelines for spending the bulk of the $50.5 billion Sandy aid package that Congress approved in January. A little more than $9 billion of that money has been spent.
Housing and Urban Development Secretary Shaun Donovan, who chaired the task force, said its "rebuilding strategy" will help the New Jersey and New York areas rebuild to withstand future storms and will "serve as models for communities across the country."
President Obama said some of the report's 69 policy recommendations have already been adopted, especially on cleaning up the New Jersey and New York shores  and helping rebuild homes and businesses. "While a great amount of work remains, we will stand with the region for as long as it takes to recover," he said.
Officials with Enterprise Community Partners, an affordable housing organization, applauded the inclusion of low-income housing as part of the plan.  "The administration has shown a proven commitment to a complete recovery for Hurricane Sandy," said Diane Yentel, the organization's senior director of public policy and government affairs.
The task force report also calls for more -- and more streamlined -- assistance for home and business owners who are wiped out by storms.
Statements of support came from elected officials across New Jersey, New York and Connecticut.
Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand, D-N.Y., said the task force work "will help get disaster relief into the hands of those who desperately need it, and lays the foundation for building a smarter and stronger city and nation."
Albert Cho, a vice president with the water company Xylem, said the report also addresses an underappreciated storm threat: water itself.
Cho, whose company used large-scale industrial pumps to move water out of flooded areas during Sandy, cited the report's call for use of innovation and data sharing -- including greater sensor technology -- to anticipate high water levels after a storm. 



Automakers' green push mostly hype



The auto companies have a serious case of Prius envy. Just look at how they seek to sell their cars.
They tout "efficient" models, making "best in class" claims, shouting "ecoconscious" and how gently they treat the environment. You'd think all they were selling was the Prius. Unfortunately, when it comes to fuel efficiency and emissions, few come close to the Toyota hybrid.
As 2014 models arrive in showrooms, the integrity of the car makers' pitch is about more than truth in advertising or savings at the pump. It goes to the heart of the Obama administration's program to fight global warming.
Under the plan's 54.5 miles per gallon standard, the fleet of new cars sold in the United States in 2025 is slated to nearly double gas mileage and halve carbon dioxide emissions, the major cause of climate change. Despite loopholes that, for example, allow the companies to make no improvements in the biggest pickup trucks' mileage through 2021, the rules are already cutting oil use and global warming pollution.
The auto industry's adherence to the rules is crucial: The less we guzzle, the less we pollute. The industry must also make cars that live up to its claims. When the claims are inflated, the federal government must step in, forcing the companies to stop misleading consumers.
How do they mislead us?
They tout highway mileage. Chevrolet's 2013 Impala delivers 18 mpg in the city and 22 mpg in combined city-highway driving. But Chevy promoted the 30 mpg highway rating that only one version of the vehicle achieved. Surprise! It bears little relationship to the mileage drivers actually get. For years, the Environmental Protection Agency has maintained loophole-riddled test procedures that they know allow automakers to cheat. It is time the agency fixed the flaws in its tests.
They apply imaginative language to mileage claims. Ford says its 2014 Taurus delivers "impressive fuel economy." But with city-highway ratings no better than 23 mpg, five of six versions fail to meet the government's fuel economy target for cars of that size. We're not impressed.
They play down crucial facts. Chevrolet touts the 38 mpg highway rating of its 2013 Spark. But the Spark only hits that mark in a manual transmission model. Just 6.5% of new cars sold here use manual transmissions.
Other than the Prius -- 2012's top-selling car in California -- most clean vehicles the companies push are built in minuscule numbers. During this year's first eight-and-a-half months, Chevrolet built about 20,000 plug-in electric-gas Volts and Nissan not quite 15,000 all-electric Leafs, Automotive News reports.
Their production pales when compared with General Motors' gas-guzzling pickups: Nearly 511,000 Silverados and Sierras, to name just two, from January through mid-August. Their best mileage? Merely 21 mpg in combined city-highway driving -- and that is for their rare hybrid versions.
The success of Obama's green program depends on how closely the auto industry sticks to the spirit, as well as the letter, of the rules it negotiated with the administration.
The car makers need to act responsibly, making efficient vehicles that slash oil use and global warming pollution while cutting costs at the pump. That's how they can pay back the American people for the $82 billion bailout that saved their tailpipes.
The Federal Trade Commission is responsible for making sure that consumers aren't bamboozled by false advertising. The government must enforce the strong clean-car and truth-in-advertising rules.
If government and industry each does its job, consumers won't drive off dealers' lots in what they think are gas-sippers, only to guzzle and pollute.
Dan Becker directs the Safe Climate Campaign, where James Gerstenzang, a former environmental reporter for the Los Angeles Times, is the editorial director. 



Cooler Pacific Ocean waters level rise in global warming



The flattening over the past 15 years of a rise in the world's average surface temperature springs from a natural cooling pattern in the eastern Pacific Ocean, climate scientists reported Wednesday.
That leveling off fed part of the skepticism toward warming predictions in recent years, but researchers behind the new report see this "hiatus" as a pause in an inevitable climb.
"Our results strongly confirm the role that (man-made) emissions are having on the climate," says climate scientist Shang-Ping Xie, senior author on the Nature journal study. "At one point over the long term, the effect we are seeing in the Pacific will stop. I'm confident the bigger increases in warming will resume."
For now, the "hiatus" in global warming has left average surface temperatures lodged about 1.4 degrees Fahrenheit above normal for the past century. The top 10 warmest years on record have all come since 1998 as a result, but none looks markedly warmer than another.
Climate scientists have disagreed over the cause of the pause. Explanations range from the atmospheric cooling effects of recent volcanic eruptions to Asia's increased industrial smog or else natural cooling oscillations in ocean surface waters.
"Our results show that Pacific cooling has indeed pulled down the average global surface increases seen from global warming," Xie says.  Essentially, a persistent La Nia-like weather pattern across the tropical eastern Pacific, an area covering about 8.2% of the globe, has created  a "cool spot," he says. That has balanced out temperature increases manifested elsewhere with the continuing melting of the Arctic, rising sea levels and record summer heat waves across continents, he says.
"The climate is complicated, and natural variability can mask trends seen over century-long timescales," says  David Easterling of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's National Climatic Data Center.  Similar plateaus in  temperature increases have occurred in seven to nine-year steps in the past, as Easterling and colleagues showed in a 2009 study. "A lot of people have the misconception that global warming means that temperatures should be steadily marching upward, but natural variability plays a big role on the decade scale," he says.
MIT's Susan Solomon is more skeptical of the Pacific Ocean cooling as an explanation. "Did the sea surface temperatures cool on their own, or were they forced to do so by ... changes in volcanic or pollution aerosols, or something else? This paper can't answer that question."
Xie acknowledges the criticism, saying some evidence suggests global warming has transferred a portion of that heat to the ocean depths.
A report in The Economist magazine questioned whether the hiatus points to overestimates in climate predictions. "I think we have strengthened the case that what we are seeing is a cooling  that will naturally end at some point, and the warming will resume," Xie says. 



EPA BAGS SAFEWAY IN GREENHOUSE GAS CASE


Safeway will pay $600,000 and has agreed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from refrigeration equipment at its 659 U.S. stores under a settlement with the Environmental Protection Agency and Department of Justice. They said the settlement with the retailer is the largest ozone protection case ever reached under the Clean Air Act. The government says Safeway violated clear air laws by not promptly fixing leaks of HCFC-22, a heat-trapping gas that contributes to climate change.
HOT SILVER
AMERICAN EAGLE COIN SALES SURGE
The U.S. Mint's sales of American Eagle silver coins are already ahead of last year's as investors snap up precious metals at a feverish pace, reports Bloomberg News. About 33.75 million ounces of the silver coins were sold so far in 2013, compared with 33.74 million all of last year, according to the mint. The annual record is 39.868 million in 2011. Silver futures for December delivery fell 4.2% Wednesday to close at $23.415 on the Comex. Prices are down 24% for the year.
WINGING IT
DELTA ORDERS 40 AIRBUS JETS
Delta Air Lines, which last took delivery of a new jet in December 2010, is buying some new airliners. Delta has signed a firm order for 30 Airbus A321s, which are used on domestic flights, and 10 A330s, larger jets used on international flights. Deliveries of the A330s are expected to start in early 2015 and the A321s a year later. The deal could be worth $5.6 billion at list prices, but discounts are common. 



Climate change leads to golden age for black qbs



George Whitfield, the coach who has been dubbed everything from a quarterback engineer to the Quarterback Whisperer, says he was caught off guard the first time he received questions like this about a player from college recruiters:
"How athletic is he? Can he beat a defender one-on-one if left in a jam?"
Whitfield, who has tutored the likes of Ben Roethlisberger, Cam Newton and Andrew Luck,  said he responded without hesitation: "I instantly said yes. I didn't have his 40 time or his shuttle time in front of me, but my answer was yes."
He also says those questions are now a prerequisite with anyone he speaks with in college football or the NFL.
"Andrew Luck can beat a defender one-on-one. RG3 (Robert Griffin III) can too," said Whitfield, who played quarterback at Tiffin (Ohio) University and then in the Arena League. "Gone are the days of seeing a Drew Bledsoe- or Jim Everett-type QB. Defensive linemen used to be rhinos who pushed the pile, but now they're agile and relentless, like bears. The evolution of defensive lineman has been significant."
A record was set this past week in the NFL, but you probably didn't hear about it. Nine African Americans started at quarterback. Seven were drafted in the last three years, starting with Cam Newton going first overall in 2011.
To combat all the sleek, powerful pass rushers, NFL teams increasingly are turning to athletic quarterbacks who can beat defenses through the air or on the ground. And African-American quarterbacks -- who in the 1980s and '90s frequently were diverted at the high school level to play receiver or cornerback or running back, according to Whitfield -- are finding immediate success: Three of the top four passers in the NFL last year in yards-per-attempt, arguably the most important stat for quarterbacks, were Griffin (first), Newton (third) and Russell Wilson (fourth).
More  talented black quarterbacks will enter the NFL in the coming years. Teddy Bridgewater of Louisville could be the No.1 pick in the 2014 draft. Clemson's Tajh Boyd looks like a first-round pick. The University of Miami's Stephen Morris could go high. And in 2015, perhaps the best of the bunch, Florida State's Jameis Winston (who has played one college game!), will be eligible for the draft.
It is conceivable that by Week1 in 2015, half of the 32 NFL teams could have a black starting quarterback.
"Absolutely that could happen," said Daniel Jeremiah, an NFL Network analyst who has been an NFL scout with the Baltimore Ravens, Philadelphia Eagles and Cleveland Browns. "So many African-American quarterbacks are now being allowed to throw the ball in college, and they're being successful. There's another whole wave of talented kids coming."
The NFL isn't just entering the read-option era. The NFL is approaching the Golden Age of the Black Quarterback.
It is difficult to discern exactly when the switch was flipped and African-American quarterbacks turned from being viewed as strictly runners into passers as well, but those interviewed for this story pointed to a grass-roots change: High school coaches, at some point, decided to put the ball in the hands of their best athlete.
Said Whitfield: "You can bracket a receiver or crowd the line to slow a back. But a dual threat at QB? You have your hands full all day with a Taylor Martinez, Tajh Boyd, Jake Locker, whoever."
On the high school level, these quarterbacks weren't running the option like Tommie Frazier at Nebraska or Tony Rice at Notre Dame. They were running the spread offense. Teams spread the field and let their best player make decisions with his arm or legs.
"These kids coming out are very skilled passers because every high school program is throwing the ball now," Jeremiah said. "Those guys weren't running the triple option in high school. They've been throwing since ninth grade."
The trend picked up when Vince Young came along, fresh off his dazzling performance in the Rose Bowl against Southern California, ready to pick up where Michael Vick left off when he was incarcerated. And JaMarcus Russell (first overall in 2007) was right behind Young.
But both were colossal busts within a few years, something that had Whitfield concerned about the perception of black quarterbacks in the NFL. Russell ate his way out of the league by 2010; Young, a disaster off the field, was let go by the Tennessee Titans in 2010.
"I was a little nervous when Vince and JaMarcus were out of the league," Whitfield said. "How do other NFL teams view that? Will other young African Americans get those opportunities?
"Then Cam comes on the scene."
Newton, who at 6-5 and 245 pounds is bigger than most linebackers, proved a turning point for not only the read option in the NFL but also the resurgence of the black quarterback. Newton completed 64% of his passes and threw for 422 yards in his first career game; his rookie season arguably is the greatest for a quarterback in NFL history.
Whitfield said he had a discussion about running vs. passing with Newton, and he tells the same thing to all the quarterbacks he coaches, such as Johnny Manziel of Texas A&M.
"I told him he had to demonstrate his way to fly the ship from the cockpit -- leave the parachute on your back as a just in case," Whitfield said. "Mike Vick, in his first few years, would play with his hand on the rip cord, and he couldn't wait to rip it and take off and do his thing. I told Cam, God gave him the biggest parachute ever for anyone who has played QB. But let's play it the way (Tom) Brady, (Peyton) Manning play the position. Survive and thrive for 10 to 15 years with no parachute."
What will NFL defenses do if this keeps up?
"They'll have to play zone," Whitfield said. "All 11 defenders need their eyes up field on the QB."
Jason McIntyre also writes for TheBigLead.com 



Miley Cyrus, Syria's hell and our tiny attention span; There's always a reason to ignore atrocities



The Syria crisis continues to spawn more twists than a pretzel factory. Two things are clear: Footage of families writhing and dying in agony from poison gas attacks by the Assad regime has not stirred Americans' outrage, and without it, no relief for suffering Syrians is in sight.
The signs of America's  shrinking attention span abound. Even before President Obama's decision to delay a vote on military intervention in Syria, maverick Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont reported that his constituents place the use of chemical weapons against civilians  last among problems Congress should address -- far behind global warming.
Miley over murder
Meanwhile, New York magazine details an online survey confirming that Americans were 12 times more interested in Miley Cyrus' racy antics than graphic reports on the Syrian regime's butchery.
This crisis is the latest chapter in the world's uneven struggle against what the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, Samantha Power, has called "the problem from hell," an issue the public inevitably prefers to ignore.
It was 70 years ago that Jewish refugee scholar Raphael Lemkin coined the term "genocide" for what Winston Churchill in 1941 had called "a crime without a name." The new word and the millions of innocents butchered by the Nazis during World War II spurred the 1948 adoption of the first international human rights law -- the U.N. Convention on Genocide. The U.S. took 40 years to ratify the  convention.
Only last year, Obama authorized the interagency Atrocities Prevention Board  to become our nation's early warning system for both "mass atrocities" and genocide. To date, the board  has done no such thing -- not in Syria, not anywhere. Its tragic inertia has done nothing but signal to tyrants that America doesn't  care about nameless victims of genocide.
Attempts to ban  chemical weapons date to World War I. In the aftermath, the League of Nations tried to ban their use,  but Adolf Hitler's death machine had other ideas. Just weeks before the Jewish New Year in 1942, the World Jewish Congress representative in Switzerland informed the U.S. and British governments of the Nazi plan to exterminate Europe's Jews using gas. Both governments were skeptical,  and  did nothing about it.
In 1988, Iraq's Saddam Hussein used poison gas,  against both Iran and Iraq's Kurdish minority. Simon Wiesenthal warned then that, if no action were taken, we would all eventually pay a price. We did when the U.S. went to war with an emboldened Saddam twice in the coming decades. Now, Hussein's horrific crimes against the Kurds have inspired Bashar Assad and company to gas Syrian men, women and children.
Needless negotiation
Whatever the final outcome of the new Russia-U.S. agreement on Syria's chemical weapons, we need to remind new generations that there are red lines worth fighting for. We had better relearn some brutal history lessons from "crimes against humanity" going back before the Holocaust.
What's at stake? If international red lines about the use of chemical weapons on civilians can be crossed with impunity, can a nuclear weapon deployed by a rogue state's proxy terrorists be so unthinkable?
If we don't act against the gassing of innocents today, we better prepare for new atrocities. On that day, we'll forget Miley Cyrus and carbon emissions will lose their drama.
Abraham Cooper is associate dean of the Simon Wiesenthal Center, where Harold Brackman is a consultant. 



Keystone pipeline no boon for jobs, ad says



In a new television commercial created to air in Washington and on cable TV nationwide, billionaire climate-change activist Tom Steyer on Sunday launched a fresh line of attack against the Keystone XL pipeline by questioning its economic benefits.
The 90-second ad, provided to in advance of its first airing, is the third in a series of four commercials Steyer has funded as part of his effort to kill the pipeline. The 1,700-mile pipeline, which would carry heavy crude oil from the tar sands in Canada to Texas refineries, awaits approval by President Obama and the State Department. TransCanada, the pipeline's builder, needs the administration's approval for a cross-border permit.
Obama has said his decision will turn on whether the pipeline increases greenhouse gas emissions.
In the latest commercial, Steyer stands before spinning wind turbines in California to tout the "hundreds of thousands of jobs" created by the USA's clean-energy industry. By contrast, he says, the pipeline would result in just 35 permanent jobs. (The figures come from a draft State Department review, which also found the pipeline would generate 42,100 direct and indirect jobs during a two-year construction phase.)
"As a businessman, I don't devalue any job," Steyer says in the commercial, "but 35 jobs maintaining a foreign oil pipeline, one that comes with real risks to the farms and towns and water supplies it would run through? That's not going to grow our economy."
He is spending $1 million on the advertising series, which will conclude with an ad discussing climate change and the devastation wrought by Hurricane Sandy last October.
Steyer, a former hedge-fund chief with an estimated net worth of $1.4 billion, is part of a vocal band of environmental activists who have made Keystone a test case of the administration's resolve to address climate change. On Sunday, he joined other activists to dedicate a "renewable energy barn" in Nebraska along the proposed pipeline route.
Steyer also is a major Democratic donor. This year alone, a Steyer-funded super PAC spent $1.8 million backing fellow Keystone foe, Massachusetts Sen. Edward Markey, in the Democrat's special election. In 2010, Steyer helped defeat an oil-industry-backed proposal that would have reversed a California law capping greenhouse-gas emissions.
At a time when the administration is working on policies to reduce carbon emissions, "it's not the time to make a 40-year commitment to harvesting some (of the) dirtiest oil in the world ... all for the benefit of a foreign oil company," said Chris Lehane, a former Clinton administration official and adviser to Steyer.
Business and union groups have urged the administration to approve TransCanada's request, which has been pending for five years.
"This is a project that's kind of a no-brainer," said Matt Letourneau, a spokesman for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. "It's a type of oil that will be produced in Canada, regardless of whether it is" piped through the United States or not, he said. 



Climate report puts the heat on humans; Global warming mainly man-made, scientists expected to say



A landmark report from the world's top climate scientists this week is likely to say with heightened certainty that humans are behind the planet's rising temperatures, andthat surface temperatures are not the only indicators of climate change.
Senior scientist Kevin Trenberth of the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo., who was a review editor on the report, says other signs that bear witness to changes include shrinking Arctic sea ice, melting Greenland ice, warming oceans (especially the deep ocean) and sea-level rise.
This will help "defuse the issue of the supposed hiatus in global warming," which Trenberth says really isn't a hiatus at all. The leveling off of average surface temperatures since 1998 is what some are calling a "hiatus" or "pause" in global warming, but that's  due in part to the fact that 1998 was such an unusually warm El Nio year. El Nio is a periodic natural warming of Pacific Ocean water that affects global weather patterns.
Also, much of the heat may be sinking into the deep oceans, according to a study released earlier this year.
Based on an earlier draft, one of the expected conclusions of the report to be released Friday in Stockholm from  the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change -- the international group that assesses the science related to climate change and its impacts -- is that there's 95% certainty that humans are the main reason behind global warming. A 2007 IPCC report put the confidence level at about 90%.
The report, the fifth the group has produced since it was established in 1988 by the United Nations, is likely to be  another  comprehensive study  on the science behind climate change. Reports are issued every few years and are a synthesis of the research published in the years since the last report.
The report is the work of more than 2,000 scientists whose drafts were reviewed by scores of governments, industry and environmental groups. "I know of no other document that has undergone this scrutiny," Thomas Stocker, co-chairman of the working group that wrote the report said this week from Stockholm. "It stands out as a reliable and indispensable source of knowledge about climate change."
The primary U.S. agency that deals with climate and weather also praises the expertise of the IPCC: "The periodic IPCC assessments are widely considered the world's most comprehensive and authoritative assessment of climate change," says Brady Phillips, a spokesman with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
"They synthesize our scientific understanding about how Earth's climate system works, project changes over time and discuss potential impacts and mitigation," he adds.
The report being completed in Stockholm deals with the physical science aspects of the climate system and is the first of a four-part assessment that covers several aspects of global warming.
Will the report have any influence on U.S. policy as it relates to climate change? "Not really," Trenberth predicts. He adds that those who matter in the administration are well informed but that those in Congress who don't believe in global warming won't budge.
Contributing: The Associated Press 



In search of the next Big Fix to combat climate change



In the 1890s, New York City was swamped  not by a storm but something smellier, horse manure.
Horses, the primary mode of transportation, dropped more than a million pounds each day, causing a sanitation crisis. No one found a fix, and some estimated the streets would eventually be buried several feet deep.
Then, "shift happened," says Harvard chemist Daniel Nocera. The automobile arrived, and almost overnight, it replaced horses and cleaned up the streets. Hailed as an environmental savior, it solved a seemingly insurmountable problem.
What a difference a century makes. Cars are now known contributors to the modern-day scourge of climate change. Their heat-trapping emissions have helped warm the planet beyond its natural variability. So sea levels have risen, and drought, heat waves and hurricanes have intensified  as explored in a year-long series, "Weathering the Change."
Weathering the Change logo
The series looks at different regions of the country.(Photo: 
As in the 1890s, society is once again looking for the Next Big Fix  whether high-altitude wind kites, "plug and play" nuclear reactors, giant synthetic trees to absorb carbon dioxide or sulfate aerosols to cool the planet. Next week at the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, two concepts will be on display: Toyota's hydrogen fuel-cell car, which emits no greenhouse gases, and Ford's hybrid, powered partly by renewable energy.
Yet will technology deliver this time? Or will inertia push the planet, already struggling with higher temperatures, to a cataclysmic breaking point?
"I'm totally optimistic," says Nocera, citing a plethora of technological advances, including his own "artificial leaf" for producing hydrogen fuel. "All over the world these things are happening." He says projections are based on current conditions but innovation can shift the paradigm, adding: "That's what discovery can do."
Even optimists agree it won't be easy. "No amount of new technology will magically solve the climate problem or even help much," unless there's broad consensus on the need for urgent action, says Harvard physicist David Keith.
In Washington, D.C., where climate change remains politically divisive, action is unlikely. Congress has rebuffed a tax on carbon emissions, which Keith and other climate scientists say would be the best way to spur clean-energy innovation. Opponents such as the American Petroleum Institute say the tax could boost energy prices and hurt the U.S. economy.
Global leaders have also made little progress in agreeing to cut greenhouse gas emissions, which continue to increase as rapidly developing nations such as India and China use coal to power economic growth.
Still, change is bubbling up. Dozens of states now require that a portion of their electricity come from renewable sources. In October, California became the first to require its utilities to install energy-storage equipment  expected to boost technologies such as batteries that can be used when the sun doesn't shine or the wind doesn't blow. China has increased its use of solar power to reduce the smog blanketing its major cities.
"The good news: We already know how to do a lot," says Jane Long, who's leading the California Council on Science and Technology's study on how the state can meet its pledge to slash emissions 80% from 1990 levels by 2050. Even so, she says breakthrough technologies, requiring a public and private partnership, will be needed to make fuels with nearly zero emissions.
There's not a lot of time to make changes, says climate scientist David Archer of the University of Chicago. He says research suggests dire changes could occur if the Earth warms 2 degrees Celsius (or 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit) this century.
"We're halfway there," Archer says, adding the planet could reach that mark as soon as 2040 if carbon emissions continue their current climb. "This is just the fire alarm. This is not the fire," he says, adding it will become costlier to cut emissions the closer the flames come.
"It's important to recognize we don't know everything about climate change," Christopher Field told reporters last December at MIT's climate "boot camp." Yet Field, a senior fellow at Stanford University and co-author of research by the United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, said enough is known to help society manage the risks and make smart investments.
The 19th-century horse-manure crisis suggests some solutions may beget new problems, says Eric Morris, an urban planning professor at Clemson University who studied that malodorous chapter of history. But he says it also offers another lesson: "Never discount the power of human ingenuity."
Here are six technologies  some old, some new  that might stem the worrisome warming trend:
1.Solar geo-engineering is sort of the Hail-Mary pass when attempts to cut carbon emissions don't go far enough. It includes blasting sulfate aerosols into the stratosphere to reflect sunlight away from Earth or spraying fine sea salt into the sky to whiten clouds.
"They all act very fast. They're all cheap enough that money is not the issue and they're all inherently imperfect," says Keith, author of the 2013 book A Case for Climate Engineering. "The thing we most need to do is talk about it," he says, adding more research is needed on the effects and efficacy.
"One powerful country could do it by itself," if desperate enough for a quick but temporary fix," says climate scientist Ken Caldeira of the Carnegie Institution for Science. He notes how Mount Pinatubo's 1991 eruption in the Philippines, which fired sulfur particles high into the air, cooled global temperatures nearly one degree Fahrenheit in 1992 and 1993.
2. Carbon capture, which traps emissions from power plants and removes them the atmosphere, might obviate the need for such a drastic step.
Because of its current high cost, no commercial, coal-fired facility has yet to employ this technique. In May, the first effort is slated to debut in Kemper County, Miss; it's designed to capture 65% of carbon emissions. Earlier this year, MIT developed a simpler scrubbing system that it says can be added relatively easy to existing facilities.
The U.S. Department of Energy is funding research on how to capture industrial emissions and either store them underground or use them to make products such as fuel, plastics, cement and fertilizer. Without federal funds, Mark Herrema founded Newlight Technologies, a California-based company that captures methane emissions from dairy farms and uses them to make plastic.
Klaus Lackner, a Columbia University geophysicist, is working on synthetic trees that absorb carbon dioxide about a thousand times faster than natural trees. Keith's Calgary-based start-up, Carbon Engineering, funded partly by Bill Gates, is developing industrial-scale technologies to capture carbon from the atmosphere and use it to produce low-carbon transportation fuels.
3. Artificial photosynthesis could yield an entirely new, emissions-free energy source. In 2011, Nocera unveiled his "artificial leaf"  a credit-card-sized silicon solar wafer that, when placed in a glass of tap water and exposed to sunlight, generates hydrogen and oxygen bubbles that can be stored and  when needed  recombined in a fuel cell to generate electricity.
"We already know how to do this," Nocera says. The problem: His water-splitting device generates hydrogen fuel, but there's no network yet of hydrogen filling stations in the United States. So his start-up, Sun Catalytix, launched to develop the device, is now focusing instead on grid-scale flow batteries.
DOE is funding related research at the Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis, led by the California Institute of Technology. "The goal is to produce a chemical liquid fuel" that can replace gasoline, says spokesman William Royea, adding it will likely take a decade or so to reduce costs enough to make it commercially viable.
4. Solar and wind power have surged in recent years, and research is finding new applications. MIT and Sandia National Laboratories have developed ultralight, atom-thin solar cells that can be embedded in flexible products like drapes or harder structures like a tablet's outer shell to produce power. Similarly, they're developing transparent cells that can be placed on windows.
Companies such as California-based Makani, acquired this year by Google, are trying to harness power from high-altitude wind, which is faster and steadier. Their challenge: tethering airborne turbines hundreds of feet off the ground without interfering with aircraft. MIT researchers are looking at far-offshore wind turbines and, to store their power and anchor them, huge concrete spheres that sit on the seafloor.
"Storage will be the game changer" for solar and wind, because their power is intermittent but electric grids need consistency, says Bob Armstrong,director of the MIT Energy Initiative. So universities, start-ups and major companies are working to boost battery performance. Some advances debuted this year, including a battery by General Electric that's paired with a Texas wind farm to provide continuous power.
5. Nuclear power, disliked by many environmentalists because of safety and waste disposal concerns, is welcomed by climate scientists including James Hansen as a major energy source that doesn't emit carbon.
DOE has offered $8.3 billion in loan guarantees to help build a nuclear power plant in Georgia and is funding efforts by two companies  North Carolina-based Babcock & Wilcox and Oregon-based NuScale Power  to develop small modular reactors. These school bus-size versions of current light water reactors could be made in U.S. factories and moved from site to site. DOE says it expects commercial operation around 2025.
TerraPower, a start-up in Bellevue, Wash., that's partly funded by Bill Gates, is developing a larger, 500-megawatt, "traveling wave" reactor that runs on nuclear waste and can go 40 years without refueling. Last year, Gates said the company is looking to build a demonstration plant and "China is one possible place." This month, DOE posted a proposed agreement between an unnamed U.S. company and the Chinese government to develop such a reactor.
6. Efficiency is often seen as the invisible energy source, because it's energy not used. Though basic technology, its potential is huge. Long, who's studying California's efforts, estimates efficiency upgrades could halve the state's energy demand by 2050. Building practices such as superior insulation and air sealing have proven to slash a home's energy use up to 90%.
"This is the best way to get at climate mitigation," says David Gottfried, co-founder of the U.S. Green Building Council, a private non-profit group. Noting that residential and commercial buildings account for nearly 40% of total U.S. energy use, he says ultra-efficient buildings can essentially become "our power plants of the future."
IBM is working with cities, utilities and the federal government to boost efficiency by using sensors, meters and digital controls to monitor and automate how energy is used. The Obama administration is requiring new cars and light trucks to nearly double their fuel efficiency by 2025. 



SECOND LOOK; NEW VIEWS ON WEEK'S TOP TALKERS


TRUTH ON CLIMATE CHANGE
I can still remember the old 1960s TV show "Truth or Consequences." But at that young age, I really didn't understand what was going on. Why did people give wrong answers on purpose? And what were "consequences"?
It appears many of our leaders still haven't grasped the meaning of "consequences" when it comes to climate change. But given the recent article "Rising sea levels torment Norfolk, Va., and coastal U.S.," we can no longer avoid the truth. Sea level rise is just one of the ways climate change will blight our health, wealth and well-being.
And the truth is that fossil fuel emissions are responsible.
Fortunately for our climate and our economy, there is an elegant, market-friendly way to roll back these emissions: a revenue-neutral carbon tax. Collecting it as a "user fee" from coal, oil and gas producers, based on the fuel's carbon content, will send a price signal to inventors and investors to find the best ways to reduce their usage or deploy substitutes. And returning 100% of the revenue back to the public will neutralize the pocketbook hit from higher energy costs.
No more excuses, and no more giving wrong answers on purpose.
Rick Knight
Brookfield, Ill.
THE NAME OF THE GAME
If we ever needed evidence of the role of money in collegiate sports, look at the bowl games.
Bowl games named after companies that sell underwear (Gildan New Mexico Bowl), weight-loss products (AdvoCare V100 Independence Bowl) and auto parts (AutoZone Liberty Bowl) dominate the schedule.
While there have always been sponsors for the games, in the past, they didn't try to push their wares so much that they took over the names of the games!
The Franklin American Mortgage Music City Bowl? The San Diego County Credit Union Poinsettia Bowl? Who needs a game for entertainment value? Pay the players and drop the hypocrisy.
William E. Sedlacek
Great Cacapon, W.Va. 



Poll: Americans want climate action; But backing for regulation has declined



Most Americans say global warming is serious and want the United States to address it, but their support for government regulations has fallen in recent years, says a poll out today  conducted for.
Three of five say global warming is a very serious global problem, and two of three say it will hurt future generations either a lot or a great deal if nothing is done to reduce it, according to the poll of 801 U.S. adults done in conjunction with Stanford University and Resources for the Future, a non-partisan research group, which funded the research.
"It seems obvious" the Earth is warming, says survey participant Ken Anderson, 30, a database administrator in West Valley, Utah, citing consensus among climate scientists about the overall issue. Yet, he says, "it will be more of a concern for my children and my children's children."
Also notable: 71% say they see the effects of global warming, and 28% say it made the damage from last year's Superstorm Sandy "much worse," though 41% say it had no effect.
"Large majorities of Americans remain concerned about global warming," says co-author Jon Krosnick, Stanford professor of communication, political science and psychology. Three of four (73%) say global warming is "probably happening," but 85% took that view in 2006.
Other climate polls -- each with differently worded questions -- have shown slightly fewer Americans say global warming is real but they also find that attitudes have stabilized in recent years. Last month, Pew Research Center said 67% see "solid evidence" the Earth is warming -- about the same as in 2012 but up from 57% in 2009 and still down from 77% in 2006.
"It's consistent with the patterns we've seen," says Frederick Mayer, a professor of public policy and the environment at Duke University. He says the findings are "modestly encouraging for modest policy action."
This year, the Environmental Protection Agency proposed a limit on the amount of greenhouse gases that new power plants can emit. The rules, slated to be finalized next year, mostly target coal-fired plants because of their relatively higher emissions.
The poll finds a slight majority of Americans, 55%, back a government limit on power plant emissions, and only 21% say it's a "good idea" to get electricity from coal.
The poll found that at least 75% say the United States should take steps soon to try to prepare for global warming, even if other nations do less. Nearly half, or 44%, say such actions will help the U.S. economy; 30% say they will hurt it.
The results show a noticeable dip in Americans who say the government should require that cars, appliances and buildings use less energy. Those who say it should require more fuel-efficient cars dropped from 44% in 2006 to 27% now. Those who favor such an approach for appliances fell from 41% to 26% in the same time period.
Stephen Ansolabehere, government professor at Harvard University, says that shift may be due to a decline in the public's confidence in the government, noting the bumpy rollout of the Affordable Care Act.
Survey participant Theolyn Brock, 42, who has lived in Florida since 1974, says hurricanes and beach erosion in her state have definitely worsened in recent decades, and she attributes part of that to global warming. She'd like to see a U.S. shift toward solar and wind power similar to what Germany's doing. She recently returned from a vacation there: "You could see it everywhere -- solar panel after solar panel." 



Arctic gets a break in 2013, but warming still ongoing; Summer ice continues to shrink; experts warn effects are far-reaching



Although the Arctic caught a break this year with a chilly summer, the region "continues to show evidence of a shift to new warmer, greener state" because of climate change, says  the annual Arctic Report Card issued Thursday by federal scientists.
"The relatively cool year in some parts of the Arctic does little to offset the long-term trend of the last 30 years," said David Kennedy of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
The report card was issued during a briefing at the American Geophysical Union  meeting in San Francisco.
One of the most obvious signs of global warming in the Arctic is shrinking summer sea ice. Although this year's ice extent wasn't as low as last year's  record low, it was still the sixth-lowest since observations began in 1979.
The sea ice in question is frozen ocean water that melts each summer, then refreezes each winter. It typically reaches its smallest "extent" in September and largest extent in March of each year.
Overall, the seven lowest minimum ice extents have all occurred in the past seven years (2007-13).
"The Arctic Report Card presents strong evidence of widespread, sustained changes that are driving the Arctic environmental system into a new state, and we can expect to see continued widespread and sustained change in the Arctic," said Martin Jeffries, editor of the report card and a University of Alaska geophysicist.
"Every aspect of Arctic life has the potential to be affected by these changes," said Kennedy, deputy undersecretary for operations at NOAA.
Other climate and weather highlights from the Arctic in 2013:
The summer in Alaska was unusually warm. The state had its second-warmest summer on record, according to the National Climatic Data Center. Fairbanks, just below the Arctic Circle, experienced a record 36 days of more than 80 degrees.
Snow  in May and June was near record low levels in the North American Arctic and broke a record for the least snow in Eurasia's Arctic.
Sea surface temperatures in August were as much as 7 degrees higher than the long-term average in the Barents and Kara seas, which can be attributed to an early retreat of sea ice cover and increased solar heating.
More generally in the Arctic, fish species are moving north, permafrost is melting, and shrubs are greening in ways that weren't seen before, which could lead to more wildfires.
It's not necessarily all bad news, as year-round shipping operations in the Arctic (even in winter, since sea ice will be thinner) will be possible, Jeffries said.
"There will be new commercial opportunities with the changing Arctic (such as cruises, mining, drilling and new shipping lanes)," he said, "but we need to be prepared for these new activities to proceed."
University of Virginia  scientist Howard Epstein warned that changes in the Arctic are felt around the globe. "The Arctic is not like Vegas," he said. "What happens in the Arctic doesn't stay in the Arctic."
NOAA began producing the annual state of the Arctic report in 2006. This year's report was compiled by 147 authors from 14 countries.
Contributing: Associated Press 



Add spread of disease to climate concerns


The climate change denialists  are subject to frequent interludes of confusion and disorientation, rather like those afflicted by the Coccidioides fungus described in article "Climate change can make you sick" (News, Thursday).
While it isn't as foreign-sounding as, say, West Nile virus, the fact is that an increasing incidence of Valley Fever, the disease caused by the fungus found in the arid soil of the Southwest,  is yet another unanticipated consequence of the accelerating greenhouse effect: the expansion of disease vectors into new areas.
As climate change becomes a fact of our daily lives, America's doctors can expect to encounter hitherto exotic ailments more and more often.
Congressional Republicans are still, of course, obsessed with their attempts to repeal the Affordable Care Act. If these anti-science lawmakers took their jobs seriously, they'd realize that these spreading insects, viruses and bacteria are a graver threat to our economy than a mild regulatory regime for health insurers. Apparently, lobbyist cash has a more debilitating impact on the brain than a dust-scattered soil fungus.
Warren Senders
Medford, Mass. 



Action better than inaction


A decline in sea ice and increased risk of extinction for some plant and animal species are linked to man-made climate change, according to a National Research Council report released last week.
The severity of global warming is potentially catastrophic. Leaning toward doing something about global warming, even though it is unproved, makes sense, particularly given that the actions needed are relatively inexpensive and beneficial anyway.
There is plenty of evidence to conclude that something is going on globally, so let's devote enough resources to monitor and predict what is likely to happen next.
The all-or-nothing fallacy that "deniers" are using is ridiculous. And explain to me how focusing on renewable energy and energy conservation is bad for the American economy.
David MacGregor
The argument should not be about whether we do anything, but about how intrusive we get.
Some approaches to reducing greenhouse gases, such as carbon credits, have a whole lot of issues and  can be abused.
Everyone agrees that the climate is changing. One side says it's natural, and the other says it's mostly because of humans.
If you work on the wrong cause,  those catastrophic predictions may still come to pass.
Who is working on what to do about the part of climate change that isn't created by man? The climate has been changing forever, so there must be a non-man-made component.
Frank Pestore
A rational mind would at least agree that even if climate change is somewhat overstated, there could not possibly be any long-term harm attempting to do our part to soften our impact on the environment.
David Hoeltje
If these "abrupt" changes to the environment described in the National Research Council report take decades, or even centuries, to happen, then I intend not to worry about them at all.
By the time a particular problem reaches crisis proportions, we will have long since run out of the ability to feed our planet, and I, along with anyone reading this, will long be dead and beyond caring.
Paul Hafner 



Climate change can make you sick; Warmer, drier weather is spreading serious ailments and claiming more victims



Software engineer Andres Chavez is used to doing things quickly, efficiently and correctly. So he knew something was seriously wrong when, on a business trip in 2009, he was so confused he could barely sign a stack of paperwork.
"I felt like I was living a quarter-second in the past," he says of the onset of Valley Fever, a disease caused by a soil fungus. It took months for his doctor to suggest that might be the cause of Chavez's episodes of "getting stupid," as his wife calls it.
"He called and asked me if I spent any time down in the Central Valley, and I said of course I did, my family lives in Livingston, Calif.," Chavez, 43, remembers.
The soil there and in much of the arid Southwest carries the Coccidioides fungus. In dry months, the dust scatters in the wind and can be breathed into the lungs, infecting humans, dogs, cats and other mammals. The incidence is rising dramatically in the Southwest, where reported cases increased tenfold from 1998 to 2011, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Valley Fever is one of multiple diseases experts say are spreading in part because of climate change. They include a brain-eating amoeba showing up in northern lakes that were once too cold to harbor it and several illnesses carried by ticks whose range is increasing.  is looking at the spread of these illnesses as part of a year-long series that explores the places and ways in which climate change affects us.
Chavez's diagnosis led him to the office of George Thompson, an infectious disease specialist who devotes two clinics a week to Valley Fever patients at the University of California-Davis Medical Center in Sacramento.
Almost fully recovered, Chavez still has occasional headaches and bouts of confusion caused by the fungus that invaded his body. In the clinic, Thompson inspected Chavez's hands, knees and ankles. "We worry about your joints with cocci," he said, calling the disease by the short form of its medical name, coccidioidomycosis (cock-sih-dee-oy-doh-my-CO- sis).
Each year, more than 150,000 people in Arizona, California, Nevada, New Mexico, Texas and Utah are infected, and Arizona and California have the most cases, according to the CDC. The incidence of laboratory-confirmed cases rose from 2,265 in 1998 to more than 22,000 in 2011.
About 60% of those infected have no symptoms and never know they have it. An additional 35% have symptoms of fatigue and weight loss and typically miss "a few weeks to a few months of work" but get better, Thompson says. In about 5% of cases, the most extreme, the fungus finds its way into the bones, the brain or the skin, while other people fail to ever clear the organism from their lungs.
For those with the most severe form of the disease, it can be a lifelong illness. Cheryl Rinn, 72, is one of Thompson's patients. The fungus invaded her brain, caused a stroke and left her in a wheelchair, paralyzed on her left side.  The former labor and delivery nurse had to move from her home in Lincoln, Calif., to an assisted living facility in Seattle to be near her daughter. "They told me I had lung cancer with brain metastases (sites where the tumor has spread). We were at our wits' end," she says. As is the case with many patients, it took months to get the proper diagnosis. By then, the damage had been done.
Valley Fever is an illness that's moving. Historically, it has been found in the dry areas of California and the Southwest. But Thompson, along with the CDC, reported three cases of cocci in eastern Washington state in 2012.
BRAIN-EATING AMOEBA
The same is true of Naegleria fowleri, "the brain-eating amoeba." It is commonly found in freshwater lakes and rivers, though human infections are rare. They tend to occur in areas where waters warm in the summer. Minnesota had its first ever infection in 2010, 550 miles farther north than an infection had ever been seen before.
Another shift is tick season in the Midwest, which is starting earlier and ending later. This year seems to be one of the worst, says Mary Anne Jackson, director of the infectious disease division at Children's Mercy Hospital in Kansas City, Mo. Ticks carry multiple diseases, but ehrlichiosis and Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever are the ones she sees most.
Ehrlichiosis is a bacterial disease often called "summer flu" by doctors. "Now it can occur any time of year," Jackson says. "I've been here since 1984, and this feels like one of the biggest tick years we've had, with the most children we've had admitted to the hospital."
Three trends contribute to the nation's changing disease map, experts say. The first is overall warming, which makes new areas hospitable to the animals and bugs that can carry disease. The second involves increased extreme weather events such as drought, rainstorms and flooding, which create situations where diseases and insects that carry them can flourish. Finally, Americans are increasingly moving to areas close to wilderness, where they are more exposed to these disease-carrying creatures.
It's impossible to say what specifically causes any single illness. But the overall patterns are clear: Where and when certain diseases strike is changing, and those changes are being affected by the warming, increasingly erratic climate.
One striking example is the movement of the black-legged tick. People in the Northeast got used to doing tick-checks of themselves and their children in the 1970s as word spread that ticks carried Lyme disease. These unpleasant bloodsucking parasites are spreading north, south and west, says Richard Ostfeld, a disease ecologist and Lyme expert at the Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies in Millbrook, N.Y.
To the north, climate change is making areas of Vermont, Maine and northern New Hampshire and New York suitable for ticks "where they never occurred in recorded history," he says. In the past, these areas got too cold.
In general, temperatures are rising more quickly across the northern USA, according to a draft of the National Climate Assessment released in 2013.
From 1895 to 2011, according to the assessment, temperatures in the Northeast increased by almost 2 degrees.
The biting arachnids are actually resettling areas our ancestors pushed them out of more than 200 years ago when forests were cleared for farmland.  Farms in New England and the upper Midwest were  abandoned when other parts of the country opened to farming. That meant  forests began to regrow, bringing back  mice and deer and the diseases they carry.
The best known is Lyme, a bacterial illness whose symptoms can include fever, headache and fatigue. Untreated, the infection can travel to the joints, heart and nervous system. Lyme is not the only tick-borne disease. The insects also transmit a range of lesser-known illnesses that more Americans may soon become familiar with. They include anaplasmosis, babesiosis, borrelia miyamotoi and Southern Tick-Associated Rash Illness, or STARI.
PLAYING DEFENSE
Valley Fever infects more than 150,000 people a year, according to the CDC. Part of that increase is due to better testing, part to a doubling of population in the area affected by the disease, says Andrew Comrie, a professor of geography at the University of Arizona who has studied Valley Fever extensively.
An erratic weather pattern Comrie has dubbed "grow and blow" also plays a role.
Wetter conditions in the fall and winter allow the fungus to flourish and grow, followed by dry conditions in the summer that dry it out so it can blow in the wind.
No one is saying the Earth is likely to be swept by a new plague that will kill everyone off because of climate change. Nor is climate change the only reason diseases are spreading. But "it's clear that environment change, including climate change, is affecting these populations," says Charles Chiu, director of the viral diagnostics and discovery center at the University of California-San Francisco.
The good news is that the robust public health system in the USA will protect people from some of those changes, says Sonia Altizer, a professor of ecology at the University of Georgia-Athens and co-author of a recent paper in the journal Science on how climate change affects infectious diseases worldwide.
The bad news is "it's going to cost us more money," she says. More mosquito abatement, more deer fences, more vaccination campaigns, more public health clinics, higher medical insurance costs. It all adds up.
"We really have to ask ourselves," she says, "how much harder we'll have to fight to keep diseases out of this country as the climate warms."
Contributing: Doyle Rice
GRAPHIC TEXT
CLIMATE FACTORS INFLUENCING VALLEY FEVER
Coccidioides is a fungus that lives in the soil in the southwestern United States. It can cause a respiratory infection known as Valley Fever or "cocci."  Cases increased tenfold from 1998 to 2011.
1) Coccidioides exists as a mold in the desert environment.
2) If disturbed, the coccidioides spores can easily become airborne and inhaled.
3) When breathed into the lungs, the spores can cause a disease called Valley Fever.
WHERE DOES COCCIDIOIDES LIVE?
Coccidioides is found in the dust and soil of semi-arid areas in the southwestern United States, Mexico and South America.
US MAP
CUTLINES
George Thompson, 36, an expert on Valley Fever, shows an MRI of patient Andres Chavez's lungs at the Lawrence J. Ellison Ambulatory Care Center in Sacramento on Nov. 14.
George Thompson, left, shows Valley Fever patient Andres Chavez Internet images of fungal spores related to Valley Fever.
Black-legged ticks can transmit Lyme disease to humans during feeding, when they latch onto the skin of a host and suck its blood. 




The vast majority of Americans in each of 40-plus states surveyed say global warming is real, serious and man-made -- and the concerns are  higher in coastal and drought-stricken areas, says an analysis out today.
At least 75% of U.S. adults say global warming has been happening, but the Stanford University research found that 84% or more took that view in states recently hit by drought -- Arizona, New Mexico, Oklahoma and Texas -- or vulnerable to sea-level rise: Delaware, Maine, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York and Rhode Island.
Despite intense debate in Congress on global warming, the research found broad public agreement on the issue and its remedies. Most say past warming has been caused largely by human activities -- ranging from a low of 65% in Utah to a high of 92% in Rhode Island. Most also back government curbs on greenhouse gas emissions from power plants -- from 62% in Utah to 90% in New Hampshire.
"The consistency of findings across states was especially surprising to me," says author and professor Jon Krosnick, director of Stanford's Political Psychology Research Group, adding the analysis is likely the first to offer state-by-state breakdowns. He plans to release the findings today  on Capitol Hill.
Krosnick says the data, based on 23 surveys -- mostly by Stanford -- suggest members of Congress who question global warming or oppose EPA power plant rules may not have an accurate view of what their constituents want.
"This is still a politically divisive issue," says Michael Dimock, director of the Pew Research Center for the People & the Press. He says just because most constituents want action doesn't mean a lawmaker's political base does. A national Pew poll last month found that while 67% of Americans say there's solid evidence the earth has been warming, the GOP is deeply divided. Just 25% of Tea Party Republicans say there's such evidence compared to 61% of other Republicans.
Stanford's analysis looks at opinion on 22 questions, some of which had sufficient data from all but four states -- Alaska, Hawaii, North Dakota and Wyoming. It finds that in every state surveyed, most Americans support efforts  to produce renewable energy and reduce air pollution from coal as well as boosting  energy efficiency for cars  and buildings.
Less popular were government policies to encourage the building of electric vehicles and nuclear power plants. Most unpopular were higher consumption taxes on electricity and gasoline. 



Study: Pacific warming 15 times faster than ever; Most of human-fueled greenhouse gases found to be absorbed by water



Although the temperature of Earth's atmosphere may have hit the "pause" button recently -- with little global warming measured over the past few years -- that hasn't been the case with the oceans.
In a study out  Thursday in the journal Science, researchers say that the middle depths of a part of the Pacific Ocean have warmed 15 times faster in the past 60 years than they did during the previous 10,000 years.
Most of the heat that humanity has put into the atmosphere since the 1970s from greenhouse gas emissions has likely been absorbed by the oceans, says  a recent report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a United Nations-sponsored group of scientists that issues updates  every few years about  global warming.
"Increases in ocean heat content and temperature are robust indicators of global warming during the past several decades,"  according to Thursday's  Science study.
"We may have underestimated the efficiency of the oceans as a storehouse for heat and energy," said study lead author Yair Rosenthal, a climate scientist at Rutgers University.
Study co-author Braddock Linsley, a Columbia University climate scientist,  said that in the past six decades the temperature of the Pacific Ocean water studied (from the surface to about 2,200 feet below) has increased by about one-third of a degree Fahrenheit.  Researchers say that while the amount of warming might seem small, it's the rate of warming that's so alarming.
"It's not so much the magnitude of the change, but the rate of change," Linsley said.
The researchers found that Pacific Ocean water has generally been cooling over the past 10,000 years, until about 800 years ago, when temperatures started to slowly rise.  After some temperature fluctuations since then, the past few decades have seen a dramatic rise in the rate of increase.
The Earth's atmosphere has been about the same temperature for the past 15 years or so, providing fuel for skeptics of man-made global warming. However, this study, along with other recent research, finds  that heat absorbed by the planet's oceans has increased significantly.
Obviously, there were no thermometers taking measurements of ocean temperatures over the past few thousand years (records from buoys go back only to the 1960s). So scientists had to use "proxy" sources to measure temperature. In this case, it was fossils of ancient marine life  that could be analyzed to reconstruct the climates in which they lived over millennia.
"This is a relatively new way of measuring past temperature data," Rosenthal noted.
How long this pause in atmospheric temperature will last  may be up to natural variability in the Pacific. When the La Nia climate pattern (cooler than average Pacific Ocean water) switches, and the Pacific reverts to warmer-than-usual El Nio, global temperatures may  shoot up again,  said Kevin Trenberth, a scientist at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo., who was not involved in the research. 



Outside money rolling into Va. governor race; As an 'incubator' of political strategy, contest heralds 2016



A group backed by the Koch brothers has organized hundreds of activists to knock on doors to turn out conservative-leaning voters. New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg is running ads about the toll of gun violence. And a California billionaire worried about climate change has  hired an impersonator to taunt the GOP nominee.
Welcome to the Virginia governor's race, where outside groups are flooding the airwaves and bombarding  homes with mailers and  calls both to shape the outcome of next week's contest between Republican Ken Cuccinelli and Democrat Terry McAuliffe and to test  campaign tactics ahead of 2016 in a presidential battleground state.
"Virginia in 2013 is a good incubator," said Dave Schwartz, Virginia state director of Americans for Prosperity, a non-profit group supported by billionaire brothers Charles and David Koch. Its affiliated foundation has undertaken a massive voter-canvassing operation ahead of the election, tapping about 1,600 activists to reach 125,000 voters by Election Day.
Abortion-rights groups, environmentalists, gun-control advocates and the National Rifle Association  have joined the battle, one of two governorships in play next week.
The stakes are high in the Old Dominion, a swing state won by President Obama in both his campaigns. In every race since 1977, the president's party has lost the state's governorship.
McAuliffe, a former Democratic National Committee chairman, aims to end that streak, and recent polls give him the edge over Cuccinelli, the state's attorney general known for his staunchly conservative views. He was the first state attorney general to file suit against Obama's 2010 health care law.
With New Jersey's Republican Gov. Chris Christie expected to cruise to re-election  next week, "the only game in town is Virginia," said Robert Roberts, a political scientist at James Madison University. "Clearly, both parties want to win this race terribly badly."
Out-of-state money dominates the race: 72%  of McAuliffe's campaign funds through Sept. 30 came from outside Virginia, according to the Virginia Public Access Project. Cuccinelli relied on out-of-state donors for 64% of his haul.
Groups backing McAuliffe's candidacy -- such as NextGen Climate Action, a political action committee founded by California billionaire Tom Steyer -- are among the race's biggest outside spenders.
Each candidate said the other would be beholden to out-of-state interests. "Liberals ... are counting on (McAuliffe) to impose a big-government, radical agenda," Cuccinelli spokeswoman Anna Nix said. McAuliffe's Josh Schwerin said McAuliffe's focus is "mainstream issues" not "ideological crusades." 



Wildfire fallout: Smoke smarts; Health risk serious - even in areas far from flames



Climate change will intensify U.S. wildfires, and the smoky air will cause respiratory problems in areas far beyond those burned, reports an environmental group Thursday. It listed how each state fared in 2011.
Two-thirds of Americans, or nearly 212 million, lived in counties beset by smoky air two years ago, according to the analysis by the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC). There were nearly 50 times more square miles  that had medium- to high-density smoke lasting at least 12 days than were burned by fire.
"It affects a much wider area of the United States than people realize," says author Kim Knowlton, an NRDC senior scientist and Columbia University health professor, adding the smoke can drift hundreds of miles. She says the smoke contains fine-particle air pollution and can not only cause asthma attacks and pneumonia but also worsen chronic heart and lung diseases.
Texas was hit hardest in 2011, when medium to high-density smoke lingered at least a week in areas that are home to 25 million people, according to the analysis based on smoke data from federal weather satellites. Knowlton says most of the smoke came from wildfires, but the data don't tease out which ones were intentional for forest management.
Illinois, which recorded no wildfires within its borders, ranked second with nearly 12 million residents exposed for at least seven days to smoke that drifted in from elsewhere. The other states with the most affected residents were, in descending order: Florida, Missouri, Georgia, Louisiana, Michigan, Alabama, Oklahoma and Iowa.
Nearly two dozen, or 22, states had no wildfires within their borders in 2011, but eight of them still had at least one week of medium- to high-intensity smoky air: Illinois, Missouri, Iowa, Kansas, Nebraska, Indiana, Wisconsin and Ohio.
The problem will only get worse, Knowlton says, citing scientific research that shows human-induced climate change is causing higher temperatures and, in some areas, more drought.
"Our landscapes are becoming more of a tinderbox," she says. During 2011, the most recent year for which NRDC could get extensive government data, heat waves and drought made many areas vulnerable to wildfire. That year, 8.7 million acres burned nationwide -- the fourth highest since 1985, according to the federal National Interagency Fire Center. Even more acres, 9.3 million, burned last year.
"Heat waves are very likely to occur more frequently and last longer," Thomas Stocker, co-chair of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's Working Group 1, said last month in announcing the findings of the Fifth Assessment Report.
The nation's Western forests will be "increasingly affected by large and intense fires that occur more frequently," concludes the draft of the third National Climate Assessment, compiled by hundreds of scientists and released earlier this year. That report says Eastern forests are less likely to see immediate increases in wildfires, except if unusual conditions coalesce such as those that have occurred recently in Florida.
The health impact can be dire. Smoke exposure from Southern California's 2003 wildfires resulted in 69 premature deaths, 778 hospitalizations, 1,431 emergency room visits and 47,605 outpatient visits, according to a 2011 study led by Ralph Delfino of the University of California-Irvine.
The NRDC report says that while more states are trying to warn residents of the health risks posed by wildfires, more monitoring stations are needed. If air quality reports are poor or it looks smoky outside, the group recommends people stay indoors, keep windows closed and avoid using fireplaces or other items that create smoke. 



Time to end heated debate?


Kudos to  Editorial Board for coming down squarely on the side of scientific fact regarding global warming ("Mounting evidence proves that climate change is here and now," Our view, Global warming debate, Tuesday). It's unfortunate that the accompanying  opposing view, "Don't believe the climate alarmists," continued the misconception that there remains anything of substance to debate. But that says more about our politically polarized country than the science.
As the Editorial Board stated, the debate needs to shift "from whether global warming is real to how to respond." We desperately need advocacy for and implementation of policies that reduce carbon emissions.
Our government has a role to play, but ultimately it will be the actions of businesses and individuals that will determine the magnitude of the warming.
Investments in energy efficiency, renewable sources of energy and a revenue-neutral carbon tax are some of the actions the federal government can take. Individuals and businesses must reduce their carbon footprints while simultaneously preparing for the inevitable impacts. The time has come to focus on solutions.
Eric Ettlinger
Member of Citizens Climate Lobby
Berkeley, Calif.
Could you please tell me why Americans should believe your editorial as opposed to the opposing view written by Joseph Bast, president of the Heartland Institute? His response makes as much sense to me as what you have written.
The theme now is that so many things are tied to global warming, whether it be early snowstorms or the number of hurricanes this year.
The American people are rightly confused, and all we can do is feel the weather. In Charlotte, we have had a colder than normal winter, spring and summer, so I am going with no global warming.
Dick Meyer
Charlotte
Why isn't the American public rightfully scared about the prospects of climate change?  It is not because we do not care about our future generations, especially our own offspring. It is because of a fundamental cognitive bias that many humans share. Namely, we are all subject to a severe bias that discounts future, remote and uncertain events in favor of present circumstances.
We can barely imagine one year ahead of us, let alone a generation or two. Our minds cannot articulate or accept how dangerous the future world may become due to climate change, and so we are not willing to sacrifice. Human decision-making is limited by our human nature.
Ken Derow
Swarthmore, Pa. 



Mounting evidence proves that climate change is here and now


All too often, global warming is discussed as something that will affect future generations of people, penguins and polar bears. That it will. But a mounting body of evidence demonstrates that climate change is neither distant nor theoretical. It is here and now:
The latest report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the internationally accepted authority on the subject, concludes that the climate system has warmed dramatically since the 1950s, and that scientists are 95% to 100% sure human influence has been the dominant cause. In the Northern Hemisphere, 1983 to 2012 was likely the warmest 30-year period of the past 1,400 years, the IPCC found. Atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases -- carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide -- have jumped to levels unprecedented in at least the past 800,000 years.
A year-long  special report, "Weathering the Change," documents how climate change is already affecting Americans. Risk and intensity of heat waves, downpours, drought and wildfires are increasing. Sea levels are rising. The oceans are becoming more acidic. In Alaska, glaciers and permafrost are melting.
A report released in September by the Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society analyzed 12 extreme weather events last year and found compelling evidence that human-caused climate change contributed to half of them. For example, the report concluded, about 35% of the extreme warmth experienced in the eastern U.S. in March-May 2012 can be attributed to man-made factors.
All this ought to be enough to shift the political debate, once and for all, from whether global warming is real to how to respond. Instead, the skeptics have seized on one piece of the 2,216-page IPCC report to renew their contention that concern is overblown.
The report found that the rate of surface warming over the past 15 years (1998-2012) was smaller than the rate calculated since 1951. This "pause" suggests some of the climate models that predicted faster warming are flawed, and natural climate variability is powerful. But it doesn't prove that warming has stopped or is inconsequential.
For one thing, much of the excess warmth being put into the climate system by greenhouse gases is sinking into the world's oceans. For another, 1998 was an extreme outlier of a warm year, thanks to El Nio, a warming of tropical Pacific water that can affect temperatures and weather around the world. Using 1998 as a starting point for a temperature trend is a bit like using Babe Ruth's 60 home runs in 1927 as a benchmark for power hitting.
Perhaps the most sobering part of the IPCC report is its conclusion that "most aspects of climate change will persist for many centuries even if emissions of carbon dioxide are stopped." This doesn't mean it's pointless to put a price on carbon pollution, or to negotiate cuts with China and other big emitters. But it shows that the response will also have to include adaptation, geoengineering research and investments in green alternatives to fossil fuels.
The latest findings ensure one other thing: In 50 years, Americans are far less likely to be talking about this month's budget follies in Washington than they are to be asking why this generation was warned about the risks of man-made climate change and didn't do more about them. 



Don't believe the climate alarmists



Environmentalists hoped the latest study from the United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) would finally end the increasingly acrimonious debate over the causes and consequences of climate change. It has had the opposite effect.
MIT physicist Richard Lindzen called the IPCC report "hilarious incoherence." British historian Rupert Darwall labeled it "nonsense" and "the manipulation of science for political ends." Judith Curry of the Georgia Institute of Technology says the IPCC suffers from "paradigm paralysis" and should be "put down."
The most precise criticism of the IPCC's report came from the editors of Nature, one of the world's most distinguished science journals: "Scientists cannot say with any certainty what rate of warming might be expected, or what effects humanity might want to prepare for, hedge against or avoid at all costs."
Despite decades of research funded by taxpayers to the tune of billions of dollars, we are no more certain about the impact of man-made greenhouse gases than we were in 1990, or even in 1979 when the National Academy of Sciences estimated the effect of a doubling of carbon dioxide to be "near 3 degrees C with a probable error of plus or minus 1.5 degrees C."
The lower end of that range, which is where the best research on the likely sensitivity of climate to carbon dioxide lands, is well within the bounds of natural variability.
Significantly, the IPCC has backed down from its previous forecasts of increases in droughts and hurricanes. And it admits, but does not explain, why no warming has occurred for the past 15 years.
Due to its charter and sheer bureaucratic momentum, the IPCC is compelled to claim it is more confident than ever in its alarmist predictions, even as real-world evidence falsifies them at every turn. Policymakers and the public have no reason to believe this discredited oracle.
It's time to start listening to other voices in the debate, such as the 50-some scientists who make up the Nongovernmental International Panel on Climate Change (NIPCC).
According to its latest report, "the IPCC has exaggerated the amount of warming likely to occur if the concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide were to double, and such warming as occurs is likely to be modest and cause no net harm to the global environment or to human well-being."
Joseph L. Bast is president of The Heartland Institute, a Chicago-based research organization that advocates free-market policies. 



As temps rise, and ground thaws, Alaska slowly sinks; In many ways, the 'last frontier' is ground zero for climate change



Up the road from Santa Claus Lane, past the candy cane-striped streetlamps, Cathy Richard's backyard has a problem that not even elves -- or the big guy in red -- could fix.
The wood deck moves up and down, like a slow-motion sleigh. "You leave for work and when you come home, it can be 7 inches higher," says Richard, 36, a married bookkeeper and mom of three children.
She knows the Grinch involved. Her home in this Fairbanks suburb, built in 2007, sits on land that thaws and refreezes so the concrete pillars holding up her deck have crumbled. The front walkway and garage floor are also cracking, and the lumpy lawn has fissures.
Bad news for Richard -- and, for the rest of us. Warmer temperatures are thawing the surface layer of land that covers most of Alaska and is known as permafrost (frozen below for at least two years in a row.) This thawing not only damages roads, buildings and airport runways, but also releases vast amounts of greenhouse gases that further warm the atmosphere -- not just over Richard's house but worldwide.
The nation's last frontier is -- in many ways -- its ground zero for climate change. Alaska's temperatures are rising twice as fast as those in the lower 48, prompting more sea ice to disappear in summer. While this may eventually open the Northwest Passage to sought-after tourism, oil exploration and trade, it also spells trouble as wildfires increase, roads buckle and tribal villages sink into the sea.
 traveled to the Fairbanks area, where workers were busy insulating thaw-damaged roads this summer amid a record number of 80-degree (or hotter) days, as the eighth stop in a year-long series to explore how climate change is changing lives.
The pace of permafrost thawing is "accelerating," says Vladimir Romanovsky, who runs the University of Alaska's Permafrost Laboratory in Fairbanks. He expects widespread degradation will start in a decade or two. By mid-century, his models suggest, permafrost could thaw in at least a third of Alaska and by 2100, in two-thirds of the state.
"This rapid thawing is unprecedented" and is largely due to fossil-fuel emissions, says Kevin Schaefer of the National Snow and Ice Data Center in Boulder, Colo. He says it's already emitting its own heat-trapping carbon dioxide and methane, but the amount will skyrocket in the next 20 to 30 years. "Once the emissions start, they can't be turned off."
Telltale signs are common -- from huge potholes in parking lots to collapsed hill slopes and leaning trees in what are called "drunken forests" in Denali National Park, home of the majestic Mount McKinley -- North America's tallest peak.
"You can see and hear the ice melting," says Ted Schuur, a permafrost expert at the University of Florida who's doing field studies in central Alaska. He says permafrost contains soil and plant matter as well as chunks of ice as big as cars. When the ice melts, the ground sinks.
He's seen it with his own cabin near Fairbanks, which was listing until he leveled one side with adjustable foundation piers.
Ruth Macchione, an 84-year-old grandmother in Fairbanks, has also witnessed the damage.
She and her late husband raised nine children in a home he built more than 50 years ago with logs that he sanded and polished. He lived there until his death in 1986 and she stayed until 2000, when she was forced to move to a small new house next door.
"Everything's tilted," she says, gazing at the old family home that is sinking into the ground. For years, she put furniture and other items on blocks to try to level them, but it got to the point where she could no longer open or close the doors.
"It's a shame," she says sadly of her partly submerged homestead. "It was well-built."
'Like burning fossil fuel'
Permafrost has existed for eons. During the last Ice Age, it swept as far south as Missouri and Illinois. Today, most of it is  in Russia and Canada, but the United States accounts for 6% of the world's total -- almost all of which exists in Alaska.
It has a top "active" layer that thaws and refreezes each year and a deeper layer that remains frozen and stores organic carbon from decaying plants and animals -- possibly twice as much carbon as in the atmosphere.
As air temperatures rise, the top layer thickens and more thawing occurs; its pace depends on local conditions. Some areas such as Fairbanks are particularly vulnerable, because the ground temperature now hovers near the thaw point so the permafrost is less stable and thaws less evenly.
The perils of permafrost have long been known. Back in the early 1970s, government scientists insisted that parts of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline be built above ground with refrigerated supports. The pipeline's oil is hot and, if buried underground in permafrost, could help thaw the top layer and cause potential spills.
Yet scientists have just begun in the past five to 10 years to figure out how much carbon is stored in the permafrost and what its accelerated thawing will mean for climate change -- and vice versa.
"It's like burning fossil fuels," says Schaefer. He and other permafrost experts have varying estimates on how much carbon dioxide and methane will be released into the atmosphere from thawing. Yet they agree climate change is exacerbating the problem and creating a "feedback loop" or vicious cycle in which thawing then exacerbates global warming.
"We're on the edge of a major transition point," Schuur says, pointing to a 2013 report he authored that found tundras worldwide may already be emitting more carbon than they absorb. He says global permafrost emissions will be significant -- akin to those from current deforestation -- but probably much less than those from power plants, cars and other burning of oil and gas.
These emissions weren't included in the global warming estimates developed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and released in September as the first part of its Fifth Assessment Report.
The report, which said with heightened certainty that humans are responsible for the planet's rising temperatures, serves as a basis for negotiating future climate treaties.
Many Alaskans are skeptical about the climate link.
"Permafrost has been thawing since the last Ice Age," says Jeff Curley, an engineer for the Alaska Department of Transportation, saying its amount depends on naturally-occurring variability. He notes the state's temperatures have fluctuated every 30 or so years.
"When I'm in Alaska, I stop talking about climate change," Schuur says, adding the term has become politically charged. Still, he says Alaskans are deeply concerned about permafrost changes.
"In our region, roads affected by permafrost thawing are very common," Curley says. "There are places around Fairbanks where there's asphalt 10 feet thick, because they were filled in to keep leveling off the road on an annual basis."
Sea ice loss poses problems
Permafrost isn't Alaska's only climate problem. As its temperatures rise (up 3.4 degrees Fahrenheit year-round in the past 60 years and 6 degrees Fahrenheit in the winter), there's not enough rain to offset the higher amount of evaporation, so surface soils dry up -- a drying amplified by thawing permafrost. The result? Increased risk of wildfires.
"All climate impacts are connected to each other," says Sarah Trainor, who directs the Alaska Center for Climate Assessment and Policy at the University of Alaska, noting the state has had more large wildfires in the past two decades than in the prior 40 years.
Declining sea ice creates another vicious cycle. Most of the world's sea ice is in the Arctic, and since it reflects sunlight (seawater absorbs it), its loss will accelerate northern warming. And, in turn, higher temperature will melt more ice.
This has happened dramatically in the past 30 years, according to measurements in September, when the extent of sea ice reaches its annual low after a summer of heat. Arctic sea ice hit an all-time low in Sept. 2012 but recovered somewhat last month.
"We could be looking at summers with essentially no sea ice on the Arctic Ocean only a few decades from now," Mark Serreze, director of the University of Colorado-Boulder's National Snow and Ice Data Center, said in announcing its 2013 satellite measurements.
The loss of sea ice offers tantalizing trade opportunities, because it could make the Northwest Passage navigable more often in summer. This sea route across the Arctic Ocean hugs Alaska's coast and can now be crossed only about every seven summers. Sought by explorers for centuries as a short-cut between Europe and Asia, it could be about 50% fewer nautical miles than a trip via the Panama Canal.
Yet while the loss of sea ice could open coastal Alaska to more oil exploration, tourism and shipping, it's not likely to help native Alaskans, says Laurence Smith, a geography professor at the University of California-Los Angeles.
He says melting ice may open up the sea but close off the land. Because much of Alaska is traversed in winter by ice -- rather than paved -- roads, he says its interior will become less accessible.
"We're more likely to see an abandonment of these northern landscapes," says Smith, author of The World in 2050: Four Forces Shaping Civilization's Northern Future.
Schuur sees sea ice loss as a huge problem but worries more about permafrost, because the latter is not as well monitored. "It's a sleeping giant that affects us all." 




Builders adapt, but it comes with a cost; One option for homes: adjustable foundations



Alaskans are learning to build differently to minimize the damage of global warming.
"We take a very practical approach to adaptation," says Jack Hebert, president of the non-profit Cold Climate Housing Research Center in Fairbanks. He and colleagues try to avoid building on permafrost, land that is frozen underground but can thaw when temperatures are too high. Since Alaska's temperatures have risen twice as fast as those in the lower 48, more permafrost is thawing, ruining roads and houses.
When permafrost can't be avoided, his center designs homes that have adjustable foundation piers and can be moved if  conditions deteriorate. To reduce fossil-fuel emissions, the center promotes lower  energy use through superior insulation, wind turbines and solar panels.
Roads are also being rebuilt with the same 8-foot-by-4-foot sheets of polystyrene insulation used in walls. Near Fairbanks, federal and state officials are spending an extra 10% to lay 4 inches of insulation underneath Goldstream Road, which was damaged by thawing, before repaving it.
"Most of Alaska's infrastructure ... could be maintained, but it will take much more money," says Vladimir Romanovsky, who runs the University of Alaska's Permafrost Laboratory. He says the Trans-Alaska Pipeline, built partly above ground with refrigerated supports, can afford thaw-preventing devices, but tribal villages cannot. "If you have money, you can survive. If not, you have to go somewhere else," he says. Several Alaskan villages are seeking funds to relocate.
Cathy Richard, who owns a home in the North Pole suburb of Fairbanks, has devised her own stopgap measures to deal with the cracks left from thawing permafrost. She's filled in fissures in her lawn so her kids -- ages 5, 10 and 15 -- can safely play outside.
She walks carefully when heading into the woods around her one-acre property. "The ground is so uneven ... it can step up 6 to 8 inches sometimes."
Since the backyard deck was heaving so much, she and her husband removed its railings, which were tugging on the house, as well as its steps, which were ripping up the ground. "It was just a mess," she recalls. They built sturdy new steps, but  let them rest on the ground. "The deck can go up and down all it wants," she says, "and we don't have to worry about it." 



LOWER TEMP ON CLIMATE CHANGE HYPE; U.N. panel report reveals green path: smart innovation, not giant regulatory schemes



There's something about the issue of climate change that prompts people to immediately head off to opposite sides of the room  with very few people congregating in the middle.
On Friday, the United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change will publish its first overview of climate science in six years. The report ought to strengthen the pragmatic middle. That's because we know pretty much what the report will say, because of extensive leaks of its contents.
Here is what it will mean and, not the least, what it won't tell you.
The panel's main message will be that global warming is real and mostly caused by man. But it will not support the alarmist predictions of global temperature rises by the end of the century of up to 9 degrees Fahrenheit.
Actual predictions will center around 1.8 F to 6.6 F.
Likewise, sea level rises of 3 feet to 6 feet are standard for alarmist rhetoric (not to mention Al Gore's 20 feet that in his movie inundated New York, Florida and San Francisco.) Yet, the panel estimates a much more manageable 1.5 feet to 2 feet by the end of the century.
For scale, the sea level rose about a foot in the past 150 years. That was no catastrophe.
The real problem for the climate panel is to explain why for the past 15 years to 20 years, while we have kept pumping out more CO2, thermometers have refused to budge.
This doesn't mean that there is not some global warming, but it likely means that temperature rises will be lower, not higher, than previous estimates. That fact makes alarmist scenarios ever more implausible.
Benefits of warming
This matters because it is the high temperature rises that are disconcerting. What the panel will not be emphasizing is that the moderate global warming that the world is experiencing is actually positive. An analysis of the major economic climate models shows that the global benefits of temperature rises of up to 3 F to 4 F outweigh the costs.
Look for instance at heat and cold deaths. Globally, and in almost all regions, many more people die from cold than heat. With increasing temperatures, fewer cold deaths will vastly outweigh extra heat deaths.
Likewise, CO2 fertilizes crops and will increase production more in temperate countries than it will slow down crop increases in tropical countries. It will lower heating costs more than it will increase cooling costs.
All these benefits are well-known to Americans. When people retire, they move to Florida, Arizona or California, but rarely Vermont.
Global warming will become a significant problem only toward the end of the century when, for instance, cooling costs begin to outweigh savings on heating, when heat effects on crops start to outweigh CO2 fertilization. One model estimates that global warming will become a net cost around the year 2075.
Ineffective solutions
Neither will the U.N. panel emphasize that the leading current solutions have almost no impact and at a very high cost.
The only major global climate policy is the European Union's 20/20 policy, which promises to cut CO2 emissions 20% by 2020. Even if the EU keeps that promise for the rest of the century, we won't be able to measure the temperature reduction by the end of the century. (Models estimate it at a trivial 0.1 F.) The cost, as estimated by the average of the major macroeconomic models, is $250 billion annually, or $20 trillion across the century. Paying $20 trillion to barely help the world in 100 years is a steep price.
And similar U.S. proposals, focusing on subsidies to wind turbines and solar power, have comparable and unaffordable costs and will unfortunately do just as little good.
The ugly truth about climate change is that unless we make green energy much cheaper, we (and especially the developing world, including China and India) will continue to use cheap fossil fuels. Right now, we spend billions of dollars on subsidies for inefficient feel-good solar panels. If we want to make a difference, we need instead to focus on research and development to drive down the price of the next generations of green energy.
We'll never succeed in making fossil fuels so expensive that nobody wants them. But we could innovate green energy to become so cheap, everybody wants it.
Bjorn Lomborg, an adjunct professor at the Copenhagen Business School, directs the Copenhagen Consensus Center. His new book is How Much have Global Problems Cost the World? A Scorecard from 1900 to 2050. 
