To reach independence, more oil drilling needed


LETTERS
Michael Brune, the executive director of the Sierra Club, makes crazy statements such as we must leave a third of oil reserves, half of gas reserves and 80% of coal reserves in the ground or we will have catastrophic climate change ("Embrace a clean-energy vision," Opposing view, Oil production debate, Wednesday).
Does the executive director have a new invention that will replace plastic in the world? Does he expect 100% of all cars and trucks to be electric soon? We will need oil and gas for a long time, and so we might as well find all we can and bring it up safely.
Dick Meyer
Charlotte
In USA TODAY's editorial "Drill, with care, everywhere from Alaska to the Atlantic," the premise of careful drilling is flawed (Our view).
Oil spill cleanup is a myth. Once oil has spilled all is lost. It is impossible to effectively clean up an oil spill. Even 25 years after the Exxon Valdez tragedy, oil still lurks under the surface of the beaches of Prince William Sound. We should not drill in and despoil our nation's most special places. America's Arctic is one of those places.
What's more, the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge's coastal plain is the "biological heart" of the refuge. It is wild, it is spectacular and it belongs to all Americans.
President Obama and his administration made the right call to take these special areas off the map from Big Oil. We can't trust companies such as Shell with "careful drilling."
Cindy Shogan, executive director
Alaska Wilderness League
Washington, D.C. 



Forecast: Debilitating decades of 'megadrought'; Scientists point to global warming



The intense drought in California is only an appetizer compared with what's coming this century across much of the western and central USA, according to a study out Thursday.
During the years 2050 to 2100, the Southwest and Great Plains will face a persistent "megadrought" worse than anything seen in the past 1,000 years, and the dry conditions will be "driven primarily" by human-induced global warming, scientists said.
There's at least an 80% chance of a megadrought in these regions if climate change continues unabated, Toby Ault, an atmospheric scientist at Cornell University and co-author of the research, said at a news conference Thursday in San Jose.
A megadrought is defined as a drought that lasts for decades or longer, such as those that scorched portions of the West in the 12th and 13th centuries. Ault said megadroughts should be considered a natural hazard like  earthquakes and hurricanes.
To identify past droughts, scientists studied tree rings to find out how much rain fell hundreds or even thousands of years ago. Scientists used that data with 17 computer model simulations to predict changes we may see.
"Natural droughts like the 1930s Dust Bowl and the current drought in the Southwest have historically lasted maybe a decade or a little less," said Ben Cook, climate scientist at NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies and lead author of the study.
"What these results are saying is we're going to get a drought similar to those events, but it is probably going to last at least 30 to 35 years," Cook said.
Though previous papers predicted the Southwest would dry because of global warming, this is the first to say drought  could exceed the worst conditions of the  past. "The study is strong scientifically," said Jonathan Overpeck at the University of Arizona's Institute of the Environment, who was not part of the study. "It strengthens our understanding of what is ahead, and it isn't pretty." 




One known way to cool the Earth



If current trends in greenhouse gas emissions continue, unprecedented megadroughts may plague much of the western USA, and the tropics may get so hot that widespread crop failures and famines become commonplace. There is a chance that climate change will prove truly catastrophic, with people suffering and dying in many parts of the world.
With the Earth in such a fevered state, there will be intense and irresistible pressure for politicians to do something, anything, to cool things off.
People in crisis won't want to wait decades for carbon dioxide-polluting energy systems to be transformed. And even if emissions of all greenhouse gases were stopped suddenly, the Earth would remain hot for thousands of years. There is basically only one way known to cool the Earth rapidly.
The only thing politicians can do to cause Earth's climate to cool within their terms in office is to reflect more of the sun's warming rays back to space. We know this is possible because we have seen volcanoes do it. In 1991, the Mount Pinatubo eruption in the Philippines injected lots of small particles high in the atmosphere, and the next year the Earth cooled, despite the continued rise in atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations.
A small fleet of airplanes could do what large volcanoes do -- create a layer of small particles high in the atmosphere that scatters incoming sunlight back to space. Cooling the Earth this way could be fast, cheap and easy.
With the Earth in a fevered state, the pressure to put on a "solar geoengineering" ice pack could become irresistible, especially if this ice pack could potentially save millions of lives.
It is possible, of course, that sustaining the kind of aerosol layer that circled the Earth in 1991 would just make things worse. We just don't know. We need to do the research so that if a climate catastrophe does occur, politicians will know whether turning down the heat  this way can really save lives and alleviate suffering.
Ignorance is not an option. The cost of not knowing is too large. The ethical path forward is to generate the knowledge now that may be needed to save lives in the future.
Ken Caldeira is a climate scientist with the Carnegie Institution for Science at Stanford. 



Electric car benefits? Just myths; Autos are popular, but potential for reducing air pollution is small



It is time to stop our green worship of the electric car. It costs us a fortune, cuts little CO2 and surprisingly kills almost twice the number of people compared with regular gasoline cars.
Electric cars' global-warming benefits are small. It is advertised as a zero-emissions car, but in reality it only shifts emissions to electricity production, with most coming from fossil fuels. As green venture capitalist Vinod Khosla likes to point out, "Electric cars are coal-powered cars."
The most popular electric car, a Nissan Leaf, over a 90,000-mile lifetime will emit 31 metric tons of CO2, based on emissions from its production, its electricity consumption at average U.S. fuel mix and its ultimate scrapping. A comparable diesel Mercedes CDI A160 over a similar lifetime will emit 3 tons more across its production, diesel consumption and ultimate scrapping.
The results are similar for the top-line Tesla car, emitting about 44 tons, about 5 tons less than a similar Audi A7 Quattro.
Subsidies vs. savings
Yes, in both cases the electric car is better, but only by a tiny bit. Avoiding 3 tons of CO2 would cost less than $27 on Europe's emissions trading market. The annual benefit is about the cost of a cup of coffee. Yet U.S. taxpayers spend up to $7,500 in tax breaks for less than $27 of climate benefits. That's a bad deal.
The other main benefit from electric cars was supposed to be lower air pollution. Yes, it might be powered by coal, but unlike the regular car, coal emissions are far away from the city centers where more people live and where damage from air pollution hits hardest.
However, new research in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences found that while gasoline cars pollute closer to home, coal-fired power pollutes a lot more.
The researchers estimate that if the U.S. has  10% more gasoline cars in 2020, 870 more people will die each year in the U.S. from air pollution. Hybrids, because they are cleaner, will kill just 610 people. But 10% more electric vehicles powered on the average U.S. electricity mix will kill 1,617 more people every year, mostly from coal pollution. The electric car kills almost three times as many as a hybrid.
Of course, electric car proponents would venture that the perceived rapid ramp-up of renewables will make future electric cars much cleaner. This, however, is mostly wishful thinking. Today, the U.S. gets 14% of its electric power from renewables. In 25 years, Obama's Energy Information Administration estimates this will have gone up just 3 percentage points to 17%.
Similarly, fossil fuels generate 65% of U.S. electricity today,  and will generate 64% in 2040, although natural gas will gain four percentage points and lead to slightly cleaner power.
Instead of focusing on electric cars, we should focus on making coal-fired power cleaner.
What proponents say
Proponents could also argue that the more mileage an electric car logs, the more its carbon footprint is reduced because the battery production is a significant part of their total emissions.
Yet, it hardly matters. The added mileage saves little in the way of emissions, and the electric car's  extended use might mean it would have to replace its batteries, entirely blowing the climate benefit.
Moreover, because the Nissan gives you only 84 miles on a charge, most people buy it as a second car for shorter trips. If such a second car goes only 50,000 miles, it will actually end up emitting more CO2.
In the public conversation, electric cars are seen as the new uber-green. But they're nothing of the sort. If we had 25 million extra electric cars rather than gasoline cars on the road in 2020, they would over their lifetime avoid 75 million tons of CO2 at a market value of more than half a billion dollars.
However, at present-day subsidies, they would cost a phenomenal $188 billion while creating more pollution than gasoline cars, costing about $35 billion in lives cut short by poor air quality. For every dollar of cost, the electric car does less than half a cent of good.
For the next decades, hybrids are the way to go, while we innovate cheaper green energy that hopefully over some decades will make the electric car worthwhile.
Bjrn Lomborg, author of The Skeptical Environmentalist and Cool It, is president of the Copenhagen Consensus Center. 




Obama vetoes Keystone Pipeline measure; Congressional override unlikely



President Obama vetoed a bill Tuesday that would have approved the Keystone XL pipeline, making good on a threat to reject a proposal embraced by Republicans as a jobs measure but opposed by environmentalists as contributing to climate change.
"The presidential power to veto legislation is one I take seriously," Obama said. "But I also take seriously my responsibility to the American people. And because this act of Congress conflicts with established executive branch procedures and cuts short thorough consideration of issues that could bear on our national interest -- including our security, safety and environment -- it has earned my veto."
It was only the third veto of his presidency, but likely not the last as he parries a Republican-controlled Congress in the final two years of his presidency.
The White House has  issued 13 formal veto threats so far this year -- the most ever at this point in a new Congress since President Reagan first started issuing written veto threats in 1985.
Obama vetoed the Keystone bill shortly after it arrived at the White House from the Senate, where  Majority Leader Mitch McConnell had held up its transmittal so that Congress could be in session when it went to the president. An override of the Keystone veto is unlikely. The bill passed the House 270-152 and the Senate 62-36, margins well short of the two-thirds majorities needed to override. McConnell said a veto override vote will be scheduled by March 3.
The 1,179-mile pipeline would connect tar sands crude oil in Alberta Canada with an existing pipeline in Nebraska, allowing  TransCanada to pump 830,000 barrels a day to refineries in the Midwest and the Gulf Coast.
Obama's veto doesn't mean the end of the Keystone debate. He could still approve the project on his own authority. In the meantime, the State Department continues to review the proposal to determine whether it's in the national interest. 



Pope puts climate heat on GOP; With Catholic advances in Republican Party hierarchy, will papal views hold sway?



It comes as bad news to many that Pope Francis' tenure at the Vatican might be short. But there are probably some Catholics in this country who gave a silent cheer when Francis intimated recently that "the Lord has placed me here for a short time" -- especially the surprisingly numerous Catholics who are leaders in the Republican Party.
Francis had already antagonized monied interests in the GOP with his populist admonitions against economic inequality and the excesses of capitalism. Now, in the run-up to this summer's greatly anticipated encyclical on climate change, the pontiff is making things even more awkward for Catholic Republicans.
If you're a progressive and you like a little schadenfreude with your politics, you're probably enjoying the obvious squirming that many high-profile Republicans are doing when the climate issue comes up. Outright denial seems to have been replaced by the currently favored "I'm not a scientist" talking point, which seems at best a stalling tactic.
Francis is not a scientist either, but that has not stopped him from leaning on something very close to scientific consensus and speaking confidently about global warming as a reality with dire moral implications -- especially for the poor and vulnerable who are at the heart of Catholic social teaching.
Pulls no punches
"A Christian who does not protect creation," Francis says, "is a Christian who does not care about the work of God."
The relationship between the GOP and Vatican looked a lot different when it was mainly Protestants playing lead roles in the Republican Party, and when popes were placing more emphasis on things, such as the dangers of secularization and sex, or back in the Ronald Reagan years, the evils of communism.
But a funny thing happened on the way to 2015. Francis became pope. And Catholics came to greater prominence in the Republican Party. There are the presidential prospects -- Jeb Bush, Marco Rubio, Bobby Jindal, Chris Christie and Rick Santorum. In Congress, there's House Speaker John Boehner and other influential Catholic Republicans such as Rep. Paul Ryan.
Doesn't Francis, with his wild popularity and liberal-sounding rhetoric, have these Catholic conservatives in a bind?
Yes. And optimists can savor the possibility of something better than that -- a breakthrough on this crucial issue.
Reports are circulating that some Republicans in Congress are looking for a lifeline on the issue. Who better than the widely respected pope to provide one?
There are reasons for skepticism, too. As Catholic Democratic leaders have shown for decades, U.S. politicians can always find a way to tune out their least favorite papal exhortations and church teachings. Consider the liberal Catholic giants of recent decades, such as Sen. Edward Kennedy and New York Gov. Mario Cuomo, and high-ranking Democrats of today, such as House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi -- all committed to the legal availability of abortion despite the church's hard line against it.
Boehner's take on pope
Boehner, for one, seems to be following a similar tack when it comes to Francis and the climate. Sure, the House speaker has waxed positive and enthusiastic about the pontiff. Boehner has even invited Francis to address Congress. But he has yet to signal any change of heart or strategy on climate.
In January, several weeks after the news that Francis would issue his environment encyclical, Boehner pulled out the standard "job killer" line in response to the latest White House action against carbon emissions. As to the reality of human-caused climate change, Boehner said he would leave that to the scientists to debate and resolve, as if they hadn't already.
Also sobering, polling data show the climate issue occupies relatively low status on Americans' lists of concerns, even though a majority accept that something is happening with the climate.
That's where the pontiff's exhortation can make the biggest difference. If the upcoming encyclical is transformative the way many hope, public opinion will swing, perhaps dramatically. Perhaps so much so that the House speaker and his GOP colleagues will realize that addressing climate is an imperative they can neither tune out nor wait out, regardless of how long Francis remains in the Vatican.
Tom Krattenmaker is a writer specializing in religion in public life, a member of USA TODAY's Board of Contributors and communications director at Yale Divinity School. His latest book is The Evangelicals You Don't Know. 




Pollution fight comes before the high court; Clean air rules are at issue in key case



Clean air rules that could save thousands of lives but cost billions of dollars will be considered by the Supreme Court today in a case that portends future  battles over climate change.
The challenge to the  government's crackdown on mercury and other airborne pollutants is the latest in a series of environmental cases to reach the court. Its conservative majority has tread lightly on President Obama's initiatives, but a bigger showdown over ozone regulations could be yet to come.
The case focuses on regulations 25 years in the making against mercury and air toxics from coal- and oil-fired power plants. The Environmental Protection Agency says those rules will prevent premature deaths and illnesses from asthma, cancer and heart disease. Opponents say the benefits are overstated and the costs understated.
What the high court must decide is whether the EPA followed the letter of the law -- in this case, the Clean Air Act, which directed the agency to regulate electric utilities if it was deemed "appropriate and necessary." Opponents say the word "appropriate" required cost estimates.
The two sides are billions of dollars apart, particularly on the potential benefits of emissions limits. Opponents say they're worth no more than $6 million annually. Advocates count $37billion to $90 billion in lives saved and illnesses avoided.
"This is one of the most significant environmental rules in our history," says Richard Revesz, director of the Institute for Policy Integrity at NYU School of Law.
Among the potential winners if the EPA rules are upheld are pregnant women and their fetuses, whose brain development can be harmed by overexposure to mercury. Environmental groups say 4,200 to 11,000 lives could be saved annually.
Losers would include coal plants, many of which are clustered in the Midwest, that have not improved their technology to reduce toxic emissions. Some would be forced to close, which would reduce generating capacity and raise the cost of electricity.
If the high court overturns the regulations, says Richard Faulk, a lawyer who represents companies in environmental cases, "we're going to see EPA's expansive and overreaching regulatory activities curtailed." 



Pollution fight comes before the high court; Clean air rules are at issue in key case



Clean air rules that could save thousands of lives but cost billions of dollars will be considered by the Supreme Court today in a case that portends future  battles over climate change.
The challenge to the  government's crackdown on mercury and other airborne pollutants is the latest in a series of environmental cases to reach the court. Its conservative majority has tread lightly on President Obama's initiatives, but a bigger showdown over ozone regulations could be yet to come.
The case focuses on regulations 25 years in the making against mercury and air toxics from coal- and oil-fired power plants. The Environmental Protection Agency says those rules will prevent premature deaths and illnesses from asthma, cancer and heart disease. Opponents say the benefits are overstated and the costs understated.
What the high court must decide is whether the EPA followed the letter of the law -- in this case, the Clean Air Act, which directed the agency to regulate electric utilities if it was deemed "appropriate and necessary." Opponents say the word "appropriate" required cost estimates.
The two sides are billions of dollars apart, particularly on the potential benefits of emissions limits. Opponents say they're worth no more than $6 million annually. Advocates count $37billion to $90 billion in lives saved and illnesses avoided.
"This is one of the most significant environmental rules in our history," says Richard Revesz, director of the Institute for Policy Integrity at NYU School of Law.
Among the potential winners if the EPA rules are upheld are pregnant women and their fetuses, whose brain development can be harmed by overexposure to mercury. Environmental groups say 4,200 to 11,000 lives could be saved annually.
Losers would include coal plants, many of which are clustered in the Midwest, that have not improved their technology to reduce toxic emissions. Some would be forced to close, which would reduce generating capacity and raise the cost of electricity.
If the high court overturns the regulations, says Richard Faulk, a lawyer who represents companies in environmental cases, "we're going to see EPA's expansive and overreaching regulatory activities curtailed." 




Senate Republicans fiddle while the world warms


Since Republicans took control of the Senate in January, their actions on climate change have ranged from oblivious to laughable to reckless.  Here's a first-quarter recap:
Jan. 21: During a debate on the Keystone XL pipeline, the Senate voted on an amendment stating that the climate is changing and that humans are significantly responsible. Forty-nine Republicans opposed the amendment; only five -- Lamar Alexander of Tennessee, Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire, Susan Collins of Maine, Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and Mark Kirk of Illinois -- voted in favor. In other words, more than 90% of the Republican caucus rejected the overwhelming scientific consensus. So much for the "sense" of the Senate.
Feb. 26: Sen. Jim Inhofe of Oklahoma, chairman of -- yes -- the Environment and Public Works Committee, carried a lumpy snowball on to the Senate floor. Inhofe, author of The Greatest Hoax: How the Global Warming Conspiracy Threatens Your Future, apparently regarded the presence of snow in Washington in February as evidence that the globe isn't warming. "Do you know what this is?" he asked. "It's a snowball just from outside here. So it's very, very cold out. Very unseasonable." Never mind that 2014 was the hottest year worldwide since modern record-keeping began, and the eastern U.S. has been an island of cool in a sea of global warmth.
March 3: Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., urged states to defy the Obama administration's flexible plan to curb carbon pollution from existing power plants, the nation's leading source of greenhouse gas emissions. "Hold back on the costly process of complying," he advised in an op-ed in the Lexington Herald-Leader. McConnell, playing to his state's large coal industry, followed up  with a detailed letter to every governor. The Senate leader howls when he thinks the Obama administration is going beyond the law, as in changing immigration regulations unilaterally, but he doesn't seem to have a problem with heedlessly counseling states to break the rules.
In contrast to the Senate GOP's embarrassing, head-in-the-sand approach to climate change, other prominent Republicans -- hardly environmental extremists but less attached to the fossil-fuel lobby -- are promoting useful ideas that could help the U.S. achieve the 26%-28% emissions reduction from 2005 levels by 2025 that the Obama administration pledged Tuesday.
Hank Paulson, Treasury secretary in the George W. Bush administration, calls global warming "a crisis we can't afford to ignore," and his institute is funding research and advocating for faster action.
George Shultz, secretary of State during the Reagan administration and a pillar of the GOP establishment, is calling for "significant and sustained support" for energy research and development. Like Paulson, Shultz backs a revenue-neutral carbon tax that would level the playing field and prevent the atmosphere from being used as a free waste dump.
This plan would put the U.S. on a path toward lower emissions and provide American leadership going into this year's global climate talks. And what is the likelihood that this Senate will approve such a sensible, market-based policy?
Call it a snowball's chance. 




The real climate embarrassment



The greatest embarrassment in the debate of human-driven climate change is that the administration -- along with congressional Democrats and radical environmentalists -- has found it easier to attack the messengers than the content of their message.
Alarmists have been critical of anyone with opposing views but have failed to be forthcoming with the data and science behind their hysteria. Despite inconclusive data, the administration continues to rely upon one-sided information to justify costly regulations.
In the event that scientists express some uncertainty of man-driven climate change, alarmists are quick to target dissenters, imposing a chilling effect on scientific inquiry.
In February, congressional Democrats did just that, targeting 100 universities, private companies, trade groups and non-profit organizations about their climate research funding, while failing to consider the principles of sound science.
Climate science should be weighed primarily on its merits -- when the work can be reproduced and independent experts have a fair chance to validate the findings, regardless of funding sources. Instead, Democrats tried to silence legitimate, intellectual and scientific inquiry.
Beyond the concerns with the science and alarmists' attempt to dismiss opposing viewpoints, EPA has been secretive -- if not downright reticent -- with many of its plans to regulate climate change.
EPA has politicized rules in apparent avoidance of public debate and criticism; it has failed to hold forums in states that will bear the brunt of new rules; and it has gone above and beyond to operate behind closed doors with its social cost of carbon estimates.
Who is the real embarrassment here?
The debate on man-driven climate change is  not over. Alarmists are distracting Americans from the pain the Obama administration's regulations will inflict on our economy while failing to make a significant impact on climate change.
Let's not forget the words of MIT atmospheric physicist Richard Lindzen, who said  carbon regulation is a bureaucrat's dream because "if you control carbon, you control life."
Sen. Jim Inhofe, R-Okla., is chairman of the  Environment and Public Works Committee. 



Strong voices needed on climate change


LETTERS
Thank you USA TODAY Editorial Board for calling out Congress' irresponsible inaction on carbon pollution dumping and climate change. Their interest in the concerns of the fossil fuel industry, at the expense of the economic and health needs of the nation, is disgraceful. As the West burns and New York and New Orleans are submerged, Sen. Jim Inhofe, R-Okla., only mutters about "alarmism." His nonsensical and out-of-touch response would be sad were it not, by virtue of his role in Congress, so tragic. Please keep speaking out on this national and world crisis. Your leadership is urgently needed.
Joel Nigg
Portland, Ore.
FACEBOOK
The cost of reducing emissions is high in terms of both money and economic growth. Americans are taxed enough already. We can ill afford a sharp cost-of-living increase especially because there is no guarantee of a pending disaster, only things that "may" or "could" happen.
Esse N Emm
If we spend money to control emissions and it turns out the problem was Mother Nature, then OK, we spent some money that was not wasted, just slightly unnecessary.  If we do nothing and find out in 10 years that the problem was us,  who do we blame?
Greg Gibson
Can someone explain the harm in reducing emissions, even if we  continue to debate the science?
Gregory Wiseman 



Billionaire to target GOP's hopefuls; Activist's emphasis is on climate change



Billionaire environmentalist Tom Steyer's political aides unveiled a campaign Monday to target the 2016 Republican presidential field on climate change issues in battleground states.
At the center of Steyer's strategy: linking the candidates to the billionaire industrialists Charles and David Koch, whose network committed to spend nearly $900million to advance its free-market agenda before the 2016 presidential election.
"The Kochs and their allies are creating the new Koch Republican Party, the party of Big Oil," Chris Lehane, Steyer's top political strategist, said Monday as he announced the new effort to put GOP White House hopefuls on what Steyers' team called the climate change "hot seat."
Steyer, a hedge fund founder, poured more than $70 million into 2014 races to help  Democrats.
Lehane would not disclose the 2016 budget but said Steyer "will spend what it takes" to make global warming a top  issue. "We need to act now," he said. "Whoever is the next president ...  represents the last, best shot to avoid a climate disaster for our children."
James Davis of Koch-aligned Freedom Partners Chamber of Commerce said his group "will remain focused on advancing free-market principles and a free society." 




Global warming didn't give Malia asthma; Obama's smoking a more likely factor



President Obama blames global warming for his daughter's asthma. Today that's politically useful spin, but the science says something different. If you're looking for a culprit, it just might be Malia's dad.
In an interview Wednesday in support of a new White House climate change awareness campaign, the president noted that his 16-year-old daughter had asthma when she was 4. He said that as a father, when your child says she has trouble breathing, "the fright you feel is terrible." Fortunately, doctors were able to treat Malia's condition quickly.
The president connected his daughter's malady to global climate change. In a discussion Tuesday, he said "all of our families are going to be vulnerable" to global warming-induced health risks because "you can't cordon yourself off from air or climate."
A White House fact sheet connected the dots, saying that asthma rates have more than doubled in the past 30 years. "Climate change is putting these individuals ... at greater risk of landing in the hospital."
The good news is that there is less reason for alarm than the White House suggests. The Environmental Protection Agency cautions that "outdoor air pollution and pollen may also worsen chronic respiratory diseases, such as asthma." Yet the EPA also reports that our air quality has improved; aggregate emissions of common pollutants have decreased 62% between 1980 and 2013. It is unlikely cleaner air is causing an increase in asthma.
Whether there is a link between asthma and global warming, Malia herself hasn't really experienced much. The high school junior was born in 1998, when temperatures spiked. By some measurements, the world hasn't warmed significantly since then.
Which brings us back to her father and his Marlboros. The president, who quit smoking years ago, has long  kept his tobacco use out of doors. That's a common-sense tactic. But sometimes, science can show common sense has less sense than you think.
Research funded by the National Institutes of Health has shown that smoking outside doesn't totally protect children from secondhand smoke. Even when smoking is done outside, nicotine in infants' hair is five times higher for babies with outside smoking parents than non-smoking parents. Smoking-related chemicals in infants' urine are seven times higher. Other studies have found similar results.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, "tobacco smoke is one of the most common asthma triggers." CDC warns, "If you have asthma, it's important that you avoid exposure to secondhand smoke."
No father wants to feel that his habits might hurt his children. But sometimes you have to look in the mirror to find the guilty party, not search the stratosphere for a hidden culprit.
James S. Robbins writes weekly for USA TODAY and is the author of The Real Custer: From Boy General to Tragic Hero. 



What's after global warming?; How about infectious diseases with no antidote or robots gone awry



Stretch your imagination. Picture a world in which the elusive goal of fully sustainable energy is achieved by the end of this decade. Low-cost, high-capacity batteries make electric cars far less expensive than their gasoline brethren. People buy them in droves. Solar panel prices plummet, so every home and office produces its own power. Wind, hydroelectric and thermal power are sufficient to serve utility-scale energy generation. We cease most oil and gas extraction.
As many know, even this miracle wouldn't avoid global warming's impacts. Greenhouse gases emitted by 2020 will persist in the atmosphere for a century. In the best case, they alone will warm Earth -- within our children's lifetimes -- by perhaps two to four degrees Fahrenheit compared with pre-industrial times.
Yet we are thinking too small if we frame climate change's core lessons around fossil fuel use, or energy sustainability. The deeper lesson concerns a critical milestone that civilization has passed. For the first time in human history, our actions have substantially changed Earth in its entirety forever: not just one nation or region, not just for a few decades. We now wield the physical capacity to irreversibly alter nature, along with our own society, on global scales. What's troubling is that we have acquired this capability -- and the motive to apply it -- before possessing the experience to do so wisely.
Prior warnings
Global-scale reach is beneficial to the extent that it enables humanity's advance, but its side effects portend new challenges. It is not hard to envision high-risk global issues that could follow global warming: rapidly proliferating infectious diseases with no antidote, self-replicating intelligent machines gone awry, genetic engineering glitches that ripple through our ecosystem, cascading species loss and much more.
We were warned. At least three times, humanity has flirted with global-scale issues.
The invention of nuclear weapons in the 1940s provided the first inkling that we could own the capacity to erase humanity. We have avoided doing this through a fragile reliance on individual and institutional restraint.
In the 1960s, concern arose that population growth might outstrip food production. Technology, in the form of increased farm productivity from fertilizers and pesticides, allowed us to avert, or at least delay, this crisis.
In the 1980s, industrial gases were found to be depleting the ozone layer. An international treaty-based solution emerged through recognition that companies could readily shift to safer chemicals.
These precursors were our training wheels for bigger things to come. Their misleading lesson was that we inevitably innovate straightforward solutions -- such as restraint, technology or treaties -- once the need arises. It won't happen with climate change. The risk of global warming was first recognized many decades after industrialization committed us to a vast carbon-based energy infrastructure. Our opportunity for simple solutions was then, not now.
Action vs. inaction
Humanity's new global reach will trigger such deferred issues. Antibiotic obsolescence could be the next. We will find that traditional tools for overcoming problems -- political, economic, social, engineering and more -- seem to fail.
Critical decisions will be profoundly uncomfortable, such as weighing our financial welfare against our children's, or one nation against another. Benefits of action, and costs of inaction, could appear hopelessly ill-defined. Resignation to a known threat might seem a more reliable course than action involving sacrifices. There could be just one opportunity to succeed. We have encountered all this with global warming.
We must evolve
Building a path forward will stretch us. The first step is recognizing that humanity's future is replete with global-scale issues, ever growing in complexity and differing in profound ways from lesser problems faced before. We must find new means to anticipate them, become adept at making wise decisions despite unknowns, and ensure rapid action spanning political boundaries. None of this will be easy.
This is a long-term perspective. It won't help resolve global warming today. But our transformation to a global-scale society has more facets, with more hidden implications, than we like to admit. We must begin facing up to poorly recognized aspects of society's global-scale future -- or risk being unprepared as each new problem arises.
William Gail, author of Climate Conundrums: What the Climate Debate Reveals About Us, is the former president of the American Meteorological Society. 




Pope to promote action on climate change; Vatican to issue document to address 'human ecology'



Pope Francis is planning to use one of the highest forms of papal expression -- an encyclical -- to promote action on climate change  to save the planet as a moral and religious imperative.
Vatican officials have outlined what the document will say and are choreographing its release -- as early as June -- for maximum global impact beyond the Catholic Church's 1.2 billion members.
Archbishop Thomas Wenski of Miami, who chairs a panel dealing with environmental issues for the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops, said the encyclical has "gone to the translators, so it's at the end of its birthing process."
First on the promotional agenda is an April 28 Vatican conference where United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki Moon will speak. The goal is to advance the morality argument that is a theme of the encyclical.
Then beginning Sept. 23, the pope will visit the White House, address a joint session of Congress -- the first pontiff to do so -- and address the U.N. General Assembly at the beginning of a summit on sustainable development.
"The timing of the encyclical is significant," Cardinal Peter Turkson said  last month. "2015 is a critical year for humanity. ... The coming 10 months are crucial."
The Ghanian cardinal, who  helped draft the encyclical, said all events lead to Paris in December, when nations  gather to debate how to slow global warming. He described the core message  as "human ecology," saying  global economic inequality is inextricably linked to climate change.
The encyclical will urge that saving the environment is saving humanity, particularly the poorest, who are disproportionately impacted by global warming, Turkson said. Francis hopes the document will "shape the discussion in Paris," Wenski said.
Climate change activists are ecstatic. "He, along with the Dali Lama and a few rock stars, are the most popular people on the planet right now," said Mary Evelyn Tucker, director of the Forum on Religion and Ecology at Yale University. "He has moral authority and efficacy."
Skeptics are apprehensive. Francis has fallen into "apocalyptic alarmism," Maureen Mullarkey wrote in the Catholic publication First Things in January. He is "bending theology to premature (and) intemperate policy endorsements."
Climate scientists frustrated that their warnings are not stirring enough public concern  expect the encyclical to get greater attention.  "It has the potential to be seismic," said Thomas Lovejoy, a professor in the environmental science and policy department at George Mason University.
The document will land as a record number of Catholics declare or consider 2016 presidential runs: Jeb Bush, Marco Rubio, Bobby Jindal, Chris Christie and Rick Santorum, all whom  disagree with Francis' views in part or entirely.
The White House, which supports steps to combat warming, praised Francis' stance. "We welcome the pope's attention and immeasurable influence to this global issue,"  spokesman Frank Benenati said last week.
List
Cuba stop set for September
Pope Francis will visit Cuba before arriving in the United States in September, the Vatican said Wednesday.
The pope is scheduled to visit Washington, New York City and Philadelphia starting  Sept.23.
Francis will be the third pope to visit Cuba, after Pope John Paul II in 1998 and Pope Benedict XVI in 2012. Francis is credited with helping the United States and Cuba reach their agreement to renew diplomatic relations by writing to leaders of both countries. 




Obama acts more without Congress; Increases use of executive action to push agenda



As President Obama stood in an Everglades swamp to speak on climate change Wednesday, the White House rolled out a package of eight executive actions, implemented by seven government agencies, to "protect the people and places that climate change puts at risk."
The announcement contained no executive orders, sweeping directives, legislative proposals or bill signings.
Instead, the actions include smaller-bore staples of a "pen-and-phone" strategy that shows no sign of letting up: a report on the value of parks to the environment, a proclamation declaring National Parks Week, and conservation efforts in Florida, Hawaii, Puget Sound and the Great Lakes.
White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest said the actions were an effort to deal with the impacts of climate change "even in the face of pretty significant opposition from Republicans in Congress."
Indeed, the actions have a political component, part of a White House strategy to work around Congress and force Republicans to respond to the president's agenda.
"Since the election, the president has had a pretty explicit strategy," said Brian Deese, a senior Obama adviser. "And it has consisted of trying stay on offense, trying to push where he can to move the agenda through executive action. You're going to keep seeing the president in that posture going forward."
"Executive action" -- a phrase Obama never uttered publicly in the first two and a half years of his presidency -- has now become so routine that new announcements come several times a week.
The actions can take many forms, from formal executive orders and presidential memoranda to more routine reports, meetings and internal bureaucratic changes. That makes any definitive count of lower-level executive actions difficult.
But by one measure, such policy rollouts are actually increasing in pace. The White House often announces executive actions with a fact sheet from the press office, and those spiked last year during what Obama called the "Year of Action." The White House issued 228 fact sheets in 2014, more than the first three years of his presidency combined.
This year, the White House has already issued three more fact sheets than last year at the same time.
The Obama strategy on executive actions closely parallels that of the Clinton White House. In Bill Clinton's last two years in office,  chief of staff John Podesta canvassed executive agencies for actions Clinton could take without going to Congress.
"One of the ways that the White House plays a role is to think forward and challenge the agencies to be proactive in saying, 'What more can we do? And what more can we do that's consistent with certain themes?'" Deese said.
This year, the major theme is "middle-class economics." The Obama White House has also used executive action to lower mortgage insurance premiums and regulate retirement accounts. And coming soon: new overtime regulations from the Department of Labor, which Obama ordered in a presidential memorandum last year.
The actions often don't originate in the White House. "Sometimes an agency has a particular initiative that they want to push that would benefit from getting a higher profile, or the president making a very concrete call to action," Deese said.
Executive action wasn't part of Obama's strategy when he first came into office.
In the fall of 2011, Obama went on a "We Can't Wait" road tour, meant to put pressure on Congress leading up to the 2012 elections. It was during that tour that Obama used the words "executive action" in public for the first time as president.
"I've told my administration to keep looking every single day for actions we can take without Congress, steps that can save consumers money, make government more efficient and responsive, and help heal the economy," Obama said in an October 2011 speech in Las Vegas. "And we're going to be announcing these executive actions on a regular basis."
In the 2014 congressional election cycle, that strategy was called the "Year of Action." It brought often controversial executive actions on climate, immigration and Cuba.
"I've got a pen, and I've got a phone. And that's all I need," he said in 2014. "Because with a pen, I can take executive actions."
Not all Obama's executive actions get congressional attention, and many involve "soft" powers -- like convening meetings, issuing reports or writing internal rules -- that are clearly within the president's authority. But for Republicans in Congress, executive action become synonymous with presidential overreach.
"One of the important roles of Congress is to serve as a check and a balance against the administration, and we've seen from this Obama administration many, many times where they've overstepped their legal authority," House Republican Whip Steve Scalise, R-La., said Wednesday. 




Koch: Not all about money; Explains his real agenda, how he's fighting 'evil' image



Charles Koch and his industrial empire are mounting an aggressive new defense of his company and his political advocacy, with the billionaire insisting his work to help elect Republicans is rooted in his decades-long quest to "increase well-being in society."
"We are doing all of this to make more money?" Koch said of charges that his drive to limit government's power will increase his bottom line. "I mean, that is so ludicrous."
"I don't know how they can say that with a straight face," he said. "We oppose as many or more things that would benefit us than would hurt us," he said, ticking off potential losses at his Minnesota oil refinery if the Keystone XL pipeline he supports is constructed and his opposition to the Export-Import Bank, whose subsidies aiding U.S. companies he has decried as corporate welfare.
His comments came during an interview with USA TODAY in his office at Koch Industries, where he discussed a range of topics -- from the nearly daily death threats against him to what he termed the "hysteria" in some quarters about global warming.
(For the record, Koch says this of climate change: "You can plausibly say that CO2 has contributed" to the planet's warming, but he sees "no evidence" to support "this theory that it's going to be catastrophic.")
The publicity-averse CEO is stepping into the spotlight as Koch Industries launched a new advertising campaign this week that shows the company's reach into all corners of Americans' daily lives -- from the Lycra in their workout clothes and the gas in their tanks. A new "We are Koch" website tells uplifting stories about employees and beneficiaries of Koch philanthropy.
The company also is advertising in professional sports arenas and earlier this year inked a multi-year sponsorship deal to promote Koch Industries during college basketball and football games at 15 universities. It's all part of a 10-year marketing campaign to introduce Koch to the  public in new ways, said Steve Lombardo, a veteran Washington marketing and crisis communications expert hired last year as the company's chief communications and marketing officer.
In October, Crown Publishing will release Koch's second book, Good Profit: How Creating Value for Others Built One of the World's Most Successful Companies, detailing his management philosophy.
Koch (COKE) has gained notoriety for helping to create and financially support a sprawling network of think tanks, policy and political groups to advance his limited-government agenda. In the 2014 election, two affiliated groups -- Americans for Prosperity and Freedom Partners -- bombarded Senate Democratic candidates with more than $90 million in advertising in a successful effort to flip control  to the Republican Party. Much of the network runs through non-profit organizations that do not disclose donors' identities.
In the run-up to last year's midterm elections, then-Senate majority leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., took the Senate floor more than three dozen times to lambaste the Koch brothers -- Charles and his younger brother and company co-owner, David -- as "un-American" and the leaders of a secret money "cult."
INCREASED PUBLICITY EFFORT
Koch said the company has stepped up publicity to help "defend ourselves from attacks and make our employees feel better about the company" and to make clear to customers and suppliers that "we're not this evil ogre trying to make your lives worse."
Malcolm Harris, a professor of finance at Friends University in Wichita, said Koch's political activity may be hurting his ability to retain and recruit talent to his ever-expanding business empire. In the last two years or so, Koch Industries has acquired all or parts of more than two dozen companies, including Molex, an Illinois-based firm that makes electronic components for products such as iPhones.
"When you acquire companies, you acquire a lot of employees," Harris said. "You want them to become part of your team, and it may be hard if they are thinking, 'Oh gee. Aren't those the guys that eat babies in the morning?' "
Lombardo would not say how much the company is pumping into its latest round of advertising, which includes digital ads on news and information sites, but called it a "significant spend."
Even as he defends his company, Koch shows no signs of backing down from the policy and political agenda that has made him the bogeyman of the left.
Earlier this year, the Kochs and their network of some 450 donors, who help underwrite everything from political ads to university research grants, committed to spending nearly $900 million in the two years ahead of the 2016 election. That's more than double the network's spending in the run-up to the 2012 elections and more than twice what the Republican National Committee invested  that year.
Charles Koch said this week that only about a third of that will be spent on electoral politics. The  network he and his brother oversee also is considering wading into the Republican presidential primary for the first time and providing financial support to as many as five candidates who have a "positive message" and the ability to prevail in the 2016 general election. That move could drive the Republican field closer to the Kochs and their libertarian positions, which often sit at odds with GOP's business-friendly and socially conservative wings.
The Kochs' move to shape the GOP nomination battle has set off alarms among campaign-finance watchdogs. "This is called the 'Koch primary,'" Fred Wertheimer, president of the campaign watchdog group Democracy 21, said of the brothers' plans. "Never mind those caucuses and primaries where millions of Americans choose their candidates. The Kochs will do it for all of us."
GLOBAL REACH
Charles and David Koch each own 44.4% of  Koch Industries, but Charles, 79, is the driving force behind the energy and manufacturing company, which employs more than 100,000 people around the globe. He's served as its chairman and CEO since 1967.
David Koch, who has the title of executive president, lives in New York where he is a leading patron of the arts and has donated heavily to cancer research. (Lincoln Center's New York State Theater, for instance, was renamed for him in 2008 to celebrate the $100 million he donated for its renovation.)
Charles Koch, however, has stayed put in the town where he grew up. His home sits inside the walled, park-like compound where he was raised, an eight-minute drive from the office. "Why move?" he said. "We've been very successful here."
His imprint is all over Wichita. The 10,500-seat sports arena at Wichita State University, for instance, bears his name, thanks to a $6 million contribution toward its renovation.
Koch's low-key persona belies his standing as the world's sixth-richest person -- a slot he shares with his brother, David Koch, on the Forbes' rankings. He shows up at the office by 7:15 a.m. most days. He's happy to chat about his 90-minute daily workout -- a routine that includes Pilates, strength training and climbing on the Stairmaster.
On a recent Tuesday, he stood with  employees in the company cafeteria, Caf Koch, getting his $4.99 meal of chili and beer-braised brisket boxed up to take back to his desk.
GOVERNMENT 'COERCION'
He and his aides express dismay he's been so vilified by politicians and popular culture. The Kochs are the subject of two critical documentaries and are regularly lampooned by late-night comics.
Didn't he expect aggressive pushback when his network was spending heavily to dislodge Democrats from the Senate's majority?
"I didn't expect it to be as dishonest and as vicious as it was," said Koch, who called the flood of death threats the "scariest" part of the last few years.
He still gets hate mail and death threats almost daily, like the one that landed in a general corporate email box Tuesday that started with "How about you start off by killing yourselves" and ended with "I hope you die slowly from prostate cancer." The missive hit particularly close to home; both Koch brothers are prostate-cancer survivors.
To hear Koch tell it, he's a reluctant political warrior -- drawn into elections as a last resort because the ideas he's been promoting for 50 years about curtailing the government's power haven't gotten enough traction.
(He doesn't consider himself a Republican,  although he's registered as one because in deep-red "Kansas, that's the game.")
In his view, less government intervention means more opportunities for individuals to thrive. He sees government's primary role as "coercion" and says it should apply that force in limited circumstances, such as national defense, public safety, enforcing settlements and preventing the spread of communicable disease.
He maintains that the government's role in most everything else -- from licensing cab drivers to regulating banks -- ought to be up for debate. His voice rises to a near-shout when talking about criminal laws and the civil forfeiture of assets in criminal investigations
"If somebody smokes a joint, we're gonna go in and bust them? We're gonna  raid houses in case somebody has a banned substance? Confiscate their houses?"
"My God," he said, "if people don't see that as an abuse of force, of too much government, then we're just not communicating."
His critics note that the Kochs' anti-regulation stance also advances their economic interests. Reducing the government's permitting powers or lobbying for reductions in federal and states gas taxes, as the Koch-affiliated Americans for Prosperity is doing around the country, helps the bottom line of a business rooted in oil refining and manufacturing.
While the company touts its environmental record, Democrats point to clashes with the government. In 2000,  Koch Industries agreed to pay $30 million for leaking oil into waterways in six states. At the time, it was the biggest civil fine levied under the Clean Water Act.
"It's very difficult to disentangle their political beliefs from their business interests. It's all wrapped up into one," said Daniel Schulman, an editor with Mother Jones magazine and the author of the 2014 biography of Koch and his three siblings, Sons of Wichita: How the Koch Brothers Became America's Most Powerful and Private Dynasty.
"That said, Charles Koch doesn't always advocate for his interests. They'll take the subsidies, and they have lobbied against those sorts of things," he said. "I absolutely think they are true believers."
In one of its most unusual alliances, Koch Industries has teamed up with the liberal think tank, Center for American Progress, and prominent Democrats, such as former Obama administration official Van Jones, to work on a broad overhaul of the criminal-justice system.
"I was initially cautious, trying to figure out whether I would find a hidden agenda if I looked under a lot of rocks," Jones said about his collaboration on the issue with Koch general counsel Mark Holden. "I take them at their word that their libertarian values have led them to this issue."
"I'm sure they'll get some positive PR from this," Jones added. "But you have to have a very strange view of PR to think that talking about getting felons out of prison is a genius public-relations move."
Holden said he hopes the new cooperation with Democrats might change the tone of the political discourse ahead of 2016.
"But I'm not naive," Holden added. "This is a political world. We'll be ready." 




USA needs to do its part to preserve the planet


On Earth Day, President Obama called on the nation to protect the planet for the generations to come and address climate change now.
Advancing clean energy is a good goal for many reasons, including reducing air pollution and transitioning away from oil that must eventually run dry. But the alarmist notion that we must drastically cut carbon emissions right now is overblown.
If the global warming scientists are correct, then it is probably already too late to prevent significant warming. For the United States to make drastic changes that would hurt our economy, while other countries continue their carbon output unabated, is crazy. Work on the transition to clean energy, sure, but the best approach to global warming is to prepare for warmer temperatures. Coastal cities, and agriculture and water officials need to plan ahead.
David Swain
Fossil fuels aren't going anywhere anytime soon. So-called renewable energies aren't going to cut it, not for now anyway. They do have drawbacks.
Richard Button
One of the fallacies that the deniers of climate change propagate is that attacking climate change costs money, and that doing nothing has no cost. Nothing is further from the truth.
Terry Mayer
If in 20 years, because of a long-term drought, we can't grow crops to feed people in America, let alone the rest of the planet, deniers will look silly.
A vast majority of climate scientists say global warming is happening. It is potentially the most serious crisis humans have faced. People say liberals are exaggerating, but the skeptics should  simply take a look at what scientists have concluded on the matter.
Joe Bezas
Climate change notwithstanding, we need to stop polluting the air we breathe, water we drink and land we live on. There is no way populations can continue to increase, with people not only consuming more than our planet produces but also destroying it. It really does not matter whether global warming is true.  Destroying the planet we live on is insanity.
Bruce Mort
Twitter
We asked our followers
what they are doing to help
the environment.
TWITTER
@USATOPINION
I'm not flying on a jumbo jet,
burning thousands of gallons
of fuel, to a conference.
@KestrelArts
I'm doing what I do every
day: Maintain a golf course
with sound environmental
practices.
@EMorrisonCGCS
I'm participating in my city's
recycling efforts, and throwing
out old cellphones, a coffee
makerand other items.
@JeffOstach
I'm eating vegan, which is
the same thing I do every
day, to help animals and the
environment.
@HMOORE123 



Carbon dioxide at 'disturbing,' 'daunting' high level; 'Greenhouse' gases gauge sparks concern



Worldwide levels of carbon dioxide -- the gas scientists say is most responsible for global warming -- reached a significant milestone for the month of March, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said Wednesday.
The global monthly average for carbon dioxide hit 400.83 parts per million in March, the first time the average surpassed 400ppm for an entire month since such measurements began in the late 1950s, NOAA said.
"It's both disturbing and daunting," said NOAA chief greenhouse gas scientist Pieter Tans. "Daunting from the standpoint on how hard it is to slow this down."
The burning of  oil, gas and coal for energy releases "greenhouse" gases such as carbon dioxide and methane. These gases have caused the Earth's temperature to rise over the past century to levels that cannot be explained by natural variability.
The last time carbon dioxide reached 400ppm was millions of years ago, according to the journal Nature Geoscience. A 2009 report in the journal found evidence of CO2 levels of 365ppm to 415ppm roughly 4.5million years ago.
"Reaching 400 parts per million as a global average is a significant milestone," Tans said.
CO2 levels were around 280ppm before the Industrial Revolution in the late 1800s, when large amounts of greenhouse gases began to be released by the burning of fossil fuels.
Carbon dioxide is invisible, odorless, and colorless, yet it's responsible for 63% of the warming attributable to all greenhouse gases, according to NOAA's Earth System Research Laboratory in Boulder, Colo.
Levels of carbon dioxide reach their highest levels in May and then go back down as plants absorb the gas. But the long-term trend is up, according to NOAA. 




IN BRIEF


Studies: Climate change  to bring more heat waves
Talk about a summer bummer.
The number of Americans sweltering through stifling heat waves could well quadruple over the next few decades, according to a study Monday in the British journal Nature Climate Change.
As if that weren't enough, a separate study in the same journal said hurricanes are likely to become more intense, even as their number declines.
In the heat wave study, researchers said people in Atlanta, Charlotte, Dallas, Houston, Oklahoma City, Phoenix, Tampa and San Antonio are most at risk of enduring many more 95-degree days by 2050.
"Extreme heat is responsible for more deaths in the United States than any other weather-related event," the study said.
-- Doyle Rice
Marines sent to Burundi to guard U.S. embassy
The Pentagon sent about 20 Marines to the volatile African nation of Burundi to help safeguard the U.S. Embassy, a Defense Department official said.
Last week, the State Department ordered dependents of U.S. government personnel to leave the country because of political violence and the potential for terrorist attacks on U.S. interests.
The Marines were sent last week to bolster security, said the  official who was not authorized to talk publicly about the deployment and spoke on condition of anonymity. The airport and land borders have been closed, according to the State Department.
A failed coup by generals in Burundi prompted President Pierre Nkurunziza to crack down on dissenters.
-- Tom Vanden Brook 




Obama slams lawmakers over climate; He says rising temps can threaten security



President Obama called out those in Congress who dismiss the effects of climate change as weak on defense, saying it would be "dereliction of duty" for the United States to ignore the national security implications of rising global temperatures.
Obama's convocation speech at the U.S. Coast Guard Academy Wednesday was his most forceful argument yet that climate change ranks alongside terrorism as a grave threat to America's future.
"I know there are still some folks back in Washington who refuse to admit that climate change is real," he told graduating cadets in New London, Conn. "Denying it or refusing to deal with it endangers our national security. It undermines the readiness of our forces."
Obama continued, "Politicians who say they care about military readiness should care about this as well."
It's not a new argument for Obama. "The Pentagon says that climate change poses immediate risks to our national security," he said in his State of the Union Address in January. "We should act like it."
In February, the White House released a national security strategy document that called climate change "an urgent and growing threat to our national security."
In addressing more than 200 graduating Coast Guard cadets and their families, Obama made the case in his most explicit rhetoric, directing that message to the servicemembers he said would be specifically challenged by climate change.
The Coast Guard, after all, patrols the coasts and has installations likely to be flooded if sea levels continue to rise.
Before congratulating the newly commissioned ensigns, Obama told them the Coast Guard should be prepared to deal with refugees from flooded and drought-stricken countries, patrol an Arctic Ocean newly opened to oil drilling and shipping lanes and respond to weather-related rescues and disaster assistance. 



Extreme weather messes with Texas; But renewable energy can help state fight



From droughts to flash floods, it seems that Texas can't get a break from extreme weather associated with climate change. Emerging recently from a multiyear record drought, with reservoirs at near record lows, now the state is suffering from flooding and record precipitation.
Texas is definitely being messed with. It is witnessing an increase in extreme high temperatures. That means more hot days and heat waves. That also means more severe droughts, which makes forest fires more likely, fire seasons more lengthy and groundwater more stressed.
Smart response
The good news is that Texas is responding to global warming and extreme weather in innovative and entrepreneurial ways. Given that it has its own power grid, it can move more quickly in shedding fossil fuels and integrating cleaner, greener energy supply. As a result, the state is leading the country in wind power generation, doubling what California has installed.
West Texas is mighty windy, and the state is profiting mightily from it. It has been powering hundreds of thousands of homes on wind for years, and wind power has been outpacing coal and natural gas growth for some time.
Texas now generates twice as much wind power as any other state. Other states should catch up. In fact, Texas reached its 2025 goal of 10,000 megawatts of installed renewable energy capacity years ago.  That's why many of the nation's clean energy jobs are being created in Texas. Much of that innovation is happening around San Antonio, where a Clean Energy Incubator is fast and furiously fostering new business in the clean-tech field.
Green in the black
Despite this profitable growth in green energy, the state Senate just voted to kill the Renewable Portfolio Standard that promotes energy transition. Without the RPS, Texas could regress into old fossil fuel habits, the dependencies that may exacerbate droughts and flooding.
That's why it's time to call a Texan bluff. It's not really about subsidies that Sen. Troy Fraser, author of the legislation to eliminate the RPS, is trying to end. If it were, then the state Senate would go after the $1 billion in tax breaks given to the natural gas industry, paid for by taxpayers. That's in comparison to the mere $12 million to $40 million needed to run the renewable standard.
The fossil fuel industry, making this vote more about special interest lobbying than public interest policymaking.
The Lone Star state which prides itself on freedom and independence, would be freer and more independent if it harnessed more wind and solar. No dependence on trucked-in or trained-down Canadian tar sand. Texas can still lead this country in an energy transition. It has done so before and can do so again. And hopefully soon, before climate change brings another mess.
Michael Shank is director of media strategy at Climate Nexus. 



Texas smartly develops renewable energies


FACEBOOK
The flash floods in Texas are examples of extreme weather that some researchers associate with climate change. A column praised the state for being a leader in green energy ("Extreme weather messes with Texas," Opinion, Friday).
Burning fossil fuels is not good for the planet, but a resource such as wind generates clean energy. A drawback is it diminishes the view of the  countryside of West Texas. But it's not much different from the oil pumps, or steel woodpeckers as some affectionately call them, that litter the fields and countrysides from Texas to South Dakota. I'll take diminished views over global warming all day long.
Jason Lewis
It's interesting how Texas increased its bet on wind and solar energy while still supporting Big Oil -- just in case the climate theorists are correct, I guess.
Antonio Navarro Diaz
The development of green energy in Texas is an example that the free market works. Where there is demand, there will be supply. You don't have to be an environmental extremist to supply demand for solar and wind energy.
Juan Alvarez
Texas taxpayers gave $1 billion in tax breaks to natural gas vs. $12 million to $40 million for renewables.
The sun will still be shining, and the wind will still be blowing when the gas runs out.
Abraham Washington
We all know that the climate changes, but the reason for those changes is the major question.
The man-made premise is sorely flawed.
Michael Conn 



Inaction is too costly


LETTERS
Commentary writer Michael Shank in "Extreme weather messes with Texas" rightly associates extreme weather events and climate change.
Scientists are telling us that climate change is leading to unusually strong rain and snow events, Arctic and Antarctic melting, and changes in weather patterns.
In Texas and elsewhere, the fossil fuel industry is seeking to continue tax breaks and subsidies for itself while discouraging investments in renewable energy. As the weather events in Texas and around the world in recent months have shown, we should more rapidly phase out fossil fuels and phase in solar, wind and other clean energy.
The alternative of ever-increasing violent weather events is too costly for humanity.
Michael Paparian
Sacramento 




Leaders to target economy, climate change, terrorism, Ukraine conflict



Leaders of the world's seven major industrial democracies wrapped up a two-day summit Monday, pledging to take  action on global problems ranging from climate change and economic  volatility to terrorism and the conflict in Ukraine.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel, the host of the Group of Seven meeting, said at a wrap-up news conference that the G-7 called for an end to the use of fossil fuels by the end of the century.
Merkel said the leaders also urged Greece to remain part of the European Union and find ways to meet budget constraints required for new loans. And they reiterated a call for continued economic sanctions against Russia until a cease fire between Ukraine and Russian-backed separatists is fully honored.
The seven leaders -- representing the U.K., Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the United States -- met at a resort in the Bavarian mountains. Russia, which normally attends the annual meeting, was barred because of its annexation of Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula last year and backing of the separatists fighting in eastern Ukraine near the Russian border. The group also refused to meet with Russian President Vladimir Putin last year, when the summit was to take place in Sochi, Russia, because of the Ukraine conflict.
Leaders also were united in their call for Russian sanctions to remain in place.
On  the Islamic State's expansion in Iraq and Syria, President Obama vowed "to get more Iraqi security forces trained, fresh, well-equipped and focused." 




Will G-7 summit yield any solid results?


FACEBOOK
During the Group of Seven summit this week in Germany, major talking points included climate change, terrorism and the conflict in Ukraine.
Russia normally attends the meeting but was excluded because it annexed Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula. President Obama and the other G-7 leaders should be very careful about pushing Russian President Vladimir Putin too far.
Dennis Buckley
What does the G-7 summit mean for most ordinary people? Nothing, because even if our "leaders" say there's a recovery, many of us see only poor workers. And the goal seems to be to make a war against Russia, which would destroy Europe.
Marc Laurent
Obama should stop wasting time at the G-7 and get home to deal with the  U.S. debt, uncontrolled immigration, bloated government and racial tension.
John Hipp
It's unlikely that proposed changes  will have any meaningful impact on the climate. The way to curb the influence of mankind is to stop population growth. Climate change is a perfect political issue. It allows politicians to spend more money while not being held accountable for the long-term results.
Larry Gilbert
If you don't take care of terrorism, the climate will make no difference.
Chance Burton
Terrorism is one of the most important issues for our society. For now, our officials appear to be doing little to fight the Islamic State, also known as ISIL.
Dan Rogers 



With stroke of pen, pope could alter climate debate; Rare encyclical this week could have huge impact



Scientists weary after years of often vicious opposition by doubters of their climate-change findings see this year as crucial to the planet's future because of a religious document expected from Pope Francis on Thursday.
The rare encyclical, or teaching letter, expected to promote climate action as a moral imperative could do more to slow global warming than international negotiations this year to limit greenhouse gas emissions, scientists say.
"The encyclical is going to go out to over 1billion Catholics -- that's a way of getting a message across to a segment of society that the scientific community could never do," said an excited Jeff Kiehl with the National Center for Atmospheric Research. "I mean, it's just unbelievable."
"I'm not a religious person at all," said Gavin Schmidt, a NASA climatologist. But he sees faith-based efforts to shift thinking on climate action as very promising. "The pope's encyclical is probably going to have a bigger impact than the Paris negotiations."
The 21st United Nations conference on climate change, which is set for December in Paris with more than 190 countries, hopes to reach agreement on emissions that would keep further warming of the planet less than 2degrees Celsius, or 3.6degrees Fahrenheit, beyond the global temperature at the time of the Industrial Revolution.
Catholic leaders expressed hope last week that the encyclical will transcend partisan fighting over the causes of climate change, arguments that have stymied efforts in  Congress and elsewhere to reduce greenhouse emissions.
"This encyclical is aimed at everyone," Pope Francis said Sunday. "Let us pray that everyone can receive its message and grow in responsibility toward the common home that God has entrusted to us."
He said Friday that to show unity of purpose, the document will be unveiled by three people: a Catholic cardinal, a Christian Orthodox church leader and a climate scientist the Vatican identified as an atheist.
The pope, who has a master's degree in chemistry and a history of environmental concern, said in January that science is largely settled on the causes of climate change and that greater stewardship of God's creation is necessary. "Mostly, in great part, it is man who has slapped nature in the face," he said.
There has already been push back from conservative Catholic religious writers and figures such as Republican presidential candidate Rick Santorum, who is Catholic, accusing the pope of being alarmist.
"The church has gotten it wrong a few times on science, and I think that we probably are better off leaving science to the scientists," Santorum recently told a radio-talk show host. "When we get involved with political and controversial scientific theories, then I think the church is probably not as forceful and credible."
Scientists, however, applaud the pope for urging moral choices in a discussion dominated by the recitation -- or among deniers, the misrepresentation -- of facts.
"Many people have this rosy view that there's this knowledge deficit, and that if we just provided more information or if we explain the science better or if we package it better, maybe with colored graphics, or write another scientific paper, that will be the one to convince (doubters)," said climate scientist Katharine Hayhoe of Texas Tech University.
"But the reality is it's not a scientific issue (any longer). It is an ideological issue. We have to appeal to people based on values. Not just on data and facts. And for me as a scientist to say that is very unusual," Hayhoe said. "So from that perspective the pope is a very effective messenger."
A website created by Australian science communicator Joe Duggan called "Is this how you feel?" contains  letters from climate scientists angry  by a lack of  action by policymakers.
"I feel like nobody's listening," Australian research fellow Helen McGregor wrote last fall.
"There is so much noise around the issue that I often feel compelled to be outraged by our own inability as a species to respond," scientist Carlo Buontempo wrote.
The vast majority say they remain optimistic. Last year, a consortium of North American universities created a speakers network for climate change discussion, and more than 370 scientists have since signed up to give talks at libraries, chambers of commerce, schools, colleges and community clubs.
But change still seems too slow, many say.
"As a scientist, I can say that it is possible for us to prevent truly catastrophic, potentially irreversible climate change. But I cannot say as a scientist whether or not we will find the will to do what's necessary," said Michael Mann, a leading climate scientist at Penn State University who published a book on the role of science deniers in subverting global warming discussions.
Mann said only strong public outcry can force policy changes, and this is where the encyclical is crucial.
"There are a lot of people out there who thus far have been either skeptical or indifferent," he  said. "I think this (encyclical) will make a difference for them." 




Pope's views on climate leaked; Draft of encyclical says change is moral issue, human-driven



Pope Francis says most climate change is due to human activity and calls it one of the most important moral issues facing society, according to a draft leaked Monday of his long-awaited encyclical on global warming.
The 191-page draft says the problem needs urgent action and is a key issue related to development and poverty.
The leaked draft in Italian was posted online  by L'Espresso magazine, prompting consternation from the Vatican. The final document is  to be released Thursday. The Vatican asked journalists to "respect professional standards" and await the final text.
The Vatican spokesman, Federico Lombardi, called the leak a "heinous decision" and cautioned that the document was a draft and not necessarily an accurate reflection of what the final encyclical will say.
"This is a major ethical breach," said church historian and retired priest Alistair Sear. "I don't know how the magazine (L'Espresso) can justify it. This should never happen, as it undermines the efforts of the church, and media were specifically asked not to release anything ahead of time."
Calls to L'Espresso seeking comment were not returned.
The draft  has six chapters, with headings such as "what is happening to our house," "the human roots of the ecological crisis" and "integrated ecology."
According to the leaked document, the pope says the world is addicted to a "culture of waste." The draft also says, "Humanity is called on to be aware of the need to change lifestyles, production and consumption."
The pope describes a "scientific consensus ... (about a) worrisome warming of the climate system."
The pope's encyclical, or teaching letter, on the environment will be disseminated to the world's 1.2billion Catholics and could influence the United Nations conference on climate change in December. More than 190 nations at the Paris conference will try to reach an agreement to limit greenhouse gas emissions.
"We expect the papal encyclical to have a major impact during a very critical year in this (climate negotiation) process," the U.N.'s top climate official, Christiana Figueres, said last week in Bonn, Germany.
Contributing: Gregg Zoroya in McLean, Va. 




Corrections and Clarifications


Monday's 1A story on Pope Francis and climate change misstated the pope's chemistry education. He studied chemistry and worked as a chemist prior to attending the seminary.
In a story Monday regarding Jeb Bush's entry into the presidential race, the wrong state was provided for Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal.
In Thursday's State-by-State report, a Tennessee item misstated the dateline. It is Halls Crossroads in East Tennessee. 



World losing security, climate, cyber battles; Justice and security require U.N. reform



As the United Nations marks its 70th anniversary later this year, there is mounting evidence that the international community is losing the fight against our most pressing security and justice challenges. From Syria to sub-Saharan Africa, an increase in mass atrocities has undermined basic human rights and reversed the trend of declining political violence since the end of the Cold War. Climate change, cyberattacks and the threat of cross-border economic shocks also pose grave implications for global security and justice.
The U.N. is by no means a perfect institution, but it must adapt to this reality. A failure to do so risks prolonging and deepening our present global crises. Three reforms will help equip the U.N. better to address modern threats and yet-unseen  challenges:
First, strengthen the conflict prevention and peace-building roles of the International Court of Justice and U.N. Human Rights Council. Those responsible for safeguarding security and those charged with upholding justice must cooperate more. For example, the U.N. Security Council should make better use of the international court's advisory opinions to help ensure that the international rule of law is respected. The Human Rights Council would benefit, too, from a dialogue with the Security Council on conflict analysis, early warning and early response to large-scale human rights abuses.
Second, enhance climate governance through new networks and increased accountability. Greenhouse gas emissions are melting polar ice caps and raising sea levels, yet an ambitious, binding global agreement to tackle climate change remains wanting. Ahead of this year's U.N. Climate Change Conference in Paris, new kinds of engagement are needed that allow mayors, civil society and business groups to announce climate-related goals more ambitious than what might emerge from the conference. Public commitments to bolder action could promote climate security and justice by shaming national leaders into deeper, more urgent commitments.
Finally, reform and expand the Security Council and broaden its engagement with a wide range of actors, creating opportunities for more countries, regional organizations, local authorities, civil society and the business community to have a voice in building peace. These efforts would enhance the legitimacy and implementation of decisions aimed at resolving conflicts.
These reforms and others are detailed in a new report by the Commission on Global Security, Justice & Governance, for which we serve as co-chairs. The commission views the twin pursuit of security and justice as essential to global governance reform, as security lends urgency and safety concerns, while justice privileges fairness, inclusiveness and equality. We invite partners to join us in pursuit of a vision of justice and security for all.
Madeleine K. Albright was secretary of State and ambassador to the United Nations. Ibrahim A. Gambari was foreign minister of Nigeria and U.N. undersecretary-general for political affairs. 



Climate change debate warms up; Environmental groups ready to capitalize on pope's encyclical, while bishops across U.S. must decide how aggressively they want to push the teachings



Press gaggles, ready-made sermons, tolling church bells, rallies, fasting, vigils and even some gentle nudging of  Congress  are just some of the echoing follow-throughs planned after the release of the pope's climate encyclical Thursday.
"I invite everyone to accept with open hearts this document," Pope Francis told tourists  gathered outside the Vatican on Wednesday. "Our 'house' is being ruined, and that hurts everyone, especially the poorest among us."
But while a core number of American bishops, joined by Catholic environmental and grass-roots groups, will ring in the unveiling with  enthusiasm, it remains to be seen how  those leading the largest single church in the U.S. -- with nearly 72 million Catholics -- will respond.
Two archbishops, including the president of the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops, will offer reaction at a news conference in Washington on Thursday morning. A handful of others will do the same across the country.
But the vast majority of America's 270 Catholic bishops will be left to decide how aggressively to push teachings they received in secret Tuesday, said  Manuel Dorantes, a Vatican spokesman.
"I think once they get the encyclical, they read it and they see what the Holy Father said, there's going to be more bishops on board," he said.
According to a draft  leaked Monday,  Francis states global warming is mostly due to human activity and  burning  fossil fuels.
Already active are the Jesuits, of whom Francis is the first to be elected pope. More than a dozen Jesuit institutions across the country will hold prayer masses  in support of the encyclical.
uphill effort
Catholic Climate Covenant, an environment education and advocacy network, is working with the conference to send out prepared sermons on the pope's climate teachings to encourage delivering  such remarks Sunday, said Dan Misleh, Climate Covenant executive director.
Other initiatives include encouraging bishop-led media events on local climate-change impacts, sending parishes  summaries of the encyclical to slip into church bulletins, designing and distributing interactive video programs and urging the tolling of bells across the nation at noon June28 -- one of the first Sundays after the encyclical's release.
Catholic environmental groups are pushing even harder, organizing congressional district events, particularly for members of Congress who are Catholic, to hand them copies of the document and "really ask them with a very prayerful and open heart to read it," said Patrick Carolan of the Franciscan Action Network.
For many organizers in the U.S., it could be an uphill struggle: A significant percentage of U.S. Catholics don't believe global warming is caused by human activity. Half of Republican Catholics don't believe in global warming at all, and of those who do, only 25% say it is caused by man, according to a recent Pew Research Center survey.
Among Catholic Democrats, 80% believe global warming is real, with six out of 10 saying it is caused by man. Overall, nearly nine out of 10  Catholics view  Francis favorably, placing large numbers of U.S. Catholics at odds with their feelings for the pontiff and his encyclical's conclusions.
building on momentum
U.S.  bishops appointed by Francis' more conservative predecessors, Pope Benedict XVI and Pope John Paul II, constitute much of today's leadership. They've focused on opposing abortion and same-sex marriage.
"I think you will see some bishops who will grab (the climate encyclical) and run with it, be very supportive," said  Thomas Reese, a senior analyst at the Catholic National Reporter. "Other bishops ... they  won't criticize it. They just won't be out there pushing it as hard as other people."
Organizers hope to keep attention  on it through  September, when the pope visits the White House, addresses a joint session of Congress and speaks to the U.N. General Assembly.
"It is stunning," Misleh said. "I have not seen anything like this, and I have worked in the Catholic Church all my life." He concedes some in the U.S. Catholic leadership might be slow to push  it.
"They also have a lot of other concerns," Misleh said.  "So I think it's unrealistic to expect them to drop everything they're doing and just focus on the environment." 




WHAT'S HAPPENING ONLINE


TODAY'S MUST-READS
We're there
as Pope Francis issues report on climate change
Stories, photos as Chicago
parade honors Blackhawks
We report as Dennis Hastert goes to court in hush-money case
MOST-CLICKED STORIES
After loss, what's next for
LeBron James
and the Cavs?
Maimed N.C. shark attack
victim, 16: It was 'biting up' my arm
Dale Earnhardt Jr. gets engaged to his longtime girlfriend
COOL STUFF
We report as U.S. Open tees off on tough course near Seattle
Steer clear! Foods to avoid when you're
traveling overseas
Stories and photos from E3, the huge video game expo
To find these items, go to
onlinetoday.usatoday.com 




Pope's push on climate change is welcome


TWITTER
We asked followers what they thought about Pope Francis weighing in on climate change.
The issue of climate change is of such importance that all support is needed. Efforts by President Obama are also very good.
@ZCarlander
The left will use the pope as a metaphorical club in the climate debate, but the real impact is a damaged, politicized papacy.
@ZanzibarBMcFate
It's not political. It's the future of our world. The politicians made it political pandering to their campaign donors.
@Bigfoot695
Follow @USATOpinion or #tellusatoday for more.
LETTERS
In USA TODAY's article "With stroke of pen, pope could alter climate debate," Republican presidential candidate Rick Santorum says the pope should stay out of the climate change debate. He says,  "We probably are better off leaving science to the scientists" (News, Monday).
If that's the case, Santorum and other Republicans need to follow his  advice. Scientists have spoken on the issue. The debate is really over.
Almost unanimously, climate scientists agree that climate change is occurring and that man is a contributing factor.
Leaders would serve us better by addressing this issue rather than denying it.
Greg Sloan
Butler, Pa. 



Francis' words carried out in bishops' hands; Church leaders were given time in advance to go over encyclical



Pope Francis' long-awaited encyclical on global warming will be in his words, but turning it into action will be in the hands of bishops and priests around the world.
In St. Peter's Square on Wednesday, Francis asked "the faithful and all persons of goodwill" to receive his letter -- an "encyclical on the care of our 'common house' that is creation" -- with open hearts.
The document summons the world to join a moral crusade to combat global warming caused by humans. After its release  Thursday, the real work will be done in thousands of Catholic dioceses across the globe.
"The bishops are already studying the document, and each will address it in his own way. Some will meet with priests, some will hold press conferences in their cities," explained senior Vatican official Ciro Benedettini. "They are under no formal obligation to do any specific thing, but this is part of the teaching of the church."
The Vatican's secretary of State sent the encyclical to the bishops several days in advance, so they would have time to study the lengthy document, meet with relevant clergy for comment and rally rank-and-file Catholics.
The usual practice is to release papal encyclicals to clergy and the public at the same time, as was done with Francis' only other one, which focused on charity and hope. The Vatican is promoting this one more aggressively, and it is getting major media attention because of the pope's involvement in a contentious topic.
"There are so many precautions with this one because it is such a delicate topic," said Andrea Tornielli, a papal observer who works with Vatican Insider, a daily  published by La Stampa newspaper. "They want to make sure nothing goes wrong."
In this case, something did go wrong: An Italian-language draft was leaked Monday and published online by L'Espresso magazine, prompting other media around the world to report its contents.
Tornielli said the process of giving advance copies to the bishops allows them to influence how the encyclical will be viewed by those under them, although the leak of the draft may undermine that goal.
The Vatican hierarchy includes many vocal skeptics of climate change. Robert Mickens, a veteran Vatican watcher, speculated this week that an opponent of Francis' encyclical had leaked the document.
Vatican officials said Wednesday that if individual clergy members oppose the pope's teachings in the encyclical, they are free to speak their minds.
"It is not a matter of dogma. Anyone can voice their concern or opposition," said Thomas Rosica, a priest in the Holy See media office. But "it is strongly encouraged that priests use the text in preaching, teaching and modeling good ecology sense in the church."
Rosica said programs will be launched to help implement the encyclical teachings. 




Pope's clarion call on climate puts deniers on the hot seat


Even before Pope Francis released his environmental call to action on Thursday, critics were taking exception and telling him to stick to theology.
In April, the Chicago-based Heartland Institute, which serves as a clearinghouse for climate-change skepticism, dispatched a contingent of so-called experts to Rome to offer what it said was "balance to the one-sided, alarmist views" the pope was getting.
More recently, as word of the pope's much-awaited encyclical started to leak out, some leading candidates for the Republican presidential nomination awkwardly began to distance themselves from the popular pope's appeal for aggressive measures to combat climate change.
"I don't get economic policy from my bishops or my cardinal or my pope," said former Florida governor Jeb Bush, a convert to Catholicism. Former Pennsylvania senator Rick Santorum, another GOP hopeful and a devout Catholic, said "we probably are better off leaving science to the scientists."
Santorum was right about that: We are better off leaving science to the scientists. And, as Francis, a trained chemist, points out in his more than 180-page document, the "best scientific research available today" is clear: The globe is warming, mainly because of greenhouse gases released by human activity. (As if to add an exclamation point to the pope's encyclical, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said Thursday that last month was the warmest May globally in modern history.)
Unlike other encyclicals focused on narrow issues of church doctrine, this one attempts to speak "to every person living on this planet." The pope's clarion call adds an ethical dimension to a debate too often bogged down in warring statistics and economic arguments. It makes clear that human-caused climate disruption is a moral issue, one that threatens mankind's only home and poses a particular threat to the world's poor.
It's true, as contrarians point out, that many of the world's poor have more immediate concerns about food, shelter, security and health. But it's simultaneously true that rising sea levels and extreme weather events pose a greater threat to the poor than to people better able to protect themselves.
The best response to climate change remains some mix of reductions in greenhouse-gas emissions, adaptation, mitigation, and development of clean-energy alternatives to fossil fuels.
How to balance these approaches is a valid topic of debate; whether there is an underlying problem is not. The bogus argument over whether climate change is happening and whether it is caused by humans should have ended long ago.
The pope's encyclical is undoubtedly timed to energize the global climate negotiations, set for Paris in December, aimed at keeping Earth's temperatures at manageable levels.
Before then, Francis is scheduled to address a joint session of Congress in September. His powerful message on climate change should have the skeptics and deniers, who've stood in the way of meaningful action, squirming in their seats and feeling the heat. 




Pope: 'No right' to destroy the earth; Francis' poetic encyclical blames many for global warming



Arguably the most popular figure on the planet takes an ocean of admirers to task over ecological plunder Thursday in a long-awaited climate encyclical.
Pope Francis makes his case for combating global warming by employing a mix of lyrical phrasing, plain speak and tough love.
He gives the environmental community everything it hoped for: a swift dismissal of global-warming deniers, along with an embrace of science showing how the planet is suffering and humans are largely at fault.
The trained chemist says he is convinced based on "the best scientific research available today" that global warming, rising seas and the likely fallout of extreme weather events are happening.
He sees fish-depleted seas, barren coral reefs and "thousands of plant and animal species" disappearing every year because of man's profligacy. "We have no right," Francis says.
His more than 180-page encyclical -- a letter circulated throughout the Catholic Church -- includes poetry: "Soil, water, mountains: everything is, as it were, a caress of God. ... There is mystical meaning to be found in a leaf, in a mountain trail, in a dewdrop, in a poor person's face."
There is also brutal observation: "The earth, our home, is beginning to look more and more like an immense pile of filth."
The core of his message, however, is a toughly worded warning about human behavior that the pontiff says is bringing  Earth to ecological despair.
Francis places blame not just with global warming deniers but many faithful who are indifferent, resigned or foolishly await technology to solve everything.
Only the world's poor escape papal wrath. He singles them out as the "excluded," an "after-thought" in international political and economic discussions. They are the least culpable for creating the problem, yet suffer most from the consequences: "When all is said and done, they frequently remain at the bottom of the pile."
"Nobody is suggesting a return to the Stone Age," he says. "But we do need to slow down and look at reality in a different way." 




Global warming deniers unmoved; Say pope's encyclical could hurt the poor, is 'a grave mistake'



Prominent climate deniers pushed back against the pope's  environmental encyclical Thursday, claiming the debate over man-made global warming has yet to be settled.
"I am concerned that his encyclical will be used by global warming alarmists to advocate for policies that will equate to the largest, most regressive tax increase in our nation's history," said Sen. Jim Inhofe, R-Okla.,  chairman of its Environment and Public Works Committee, said in a statement to USA TODAY.
In his decree, Pope Francis, who said global warming was mostly caused by humans, argued the poor stand to suffer the most from extreme weather events tied to climate change already wreaking havoc across the planet.
But Inhofe -- who famously tossed a snowball on the Senate floor  as his proof global warming is a hoax -- said the impoverished stand to  lose the most from  actions taken to combat warming.
"It's the poor that spend the largest portion of their expendable income to heat their homes, and they will be the ones to carry the heaviest burden of such onerous policies" that would increase their taxes, he said.
The Heartland Institute, a conservative, Chicago-based think tank, which sent representatives to the Vatican in April for a climate summit, also weighed in.
"Pope Francis' heart is in the right place, but he made a grave mistake by putting his trust and moral authority behind agenda-driven bureaucrats at the United Nations who have been bearing false witness about the causes and consequences of climate change for decades," spokesman Jim Lakely said in a statement. 




Pope links financial crisis, climate change



As President-elect Barack Obama prepared to take office at the height of the financial crisis in 2008, his then-chief of staff, Rahm Emanuel, famously said that no serious crisis should go to waste, suggesting that it would now be possible to put in long-needed reforms.
But in the view of many critics, the crisis was indeed wasted, and the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial reform act, whatever its merits, fell short of the radical restructuring needed to forestall a repeat of the crisis, perhaps in the very near future.
"The financial crisis of 2007-08 provided an opportunity to develop a new economy, more attentive to ethical principles, and new ways of regulating speculative financial practices and virtual wealth," one of the newest critics of financial reform wrote last week. "But the response to the crisis did not include rethinking the outdated criteria which continue to rule the world."
This was not another broadside against the banks from Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass., or another blast at Wall Street from independent Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders as he seeks the Democratic nomination for president.
This was the verdict of Pope Francis, who couched his urgent call for a more vigorous response to climate change in terms of subordinating economic growth and financial power to the welfare of humankind and the future of the planet.
The pope, a Jesuit and former archbishop of Buenos Aires, criticized the political response to the financial crisis in words that perfectly described the actions of the Obama administration.
"Saving banks at any cost, making the public pay the price, foregoing a firm commitment to reviewing and reforming the entire system," Francis wrote in his second papal encyclical, "only reaffirms the absolute power of a financial system, a power which has no future and will only give rise to new crises after a slow, costly and only apparent recovery."
Focusing on the need to combat climate change, the pope rejected the neoliberal mantra that uninhibited economic growth and unrestricted free markets are the keys to long-term prosperity.
"Some circles maintain that current economics and technology will solve all environmental problems," Francis wrote, "that the problems of global hunger and poverty will be resolved simply by market growth."
But their actions belie their words, he continued, "by showing no interest in more balanced levels of production, a better distribution of wealth, concern for the environment and the rights of future generations."
The pope's encyclical -- "Laudato Si', On Care for Our Common Home" -- is not intended as a dogmatic pronouncement but as a pastoral admonition, a moral call to action not only for Catholics but for society as a whole.
The pope's ready acceptance of the science on climate change -- Francis was trained as a chemist -- and his rejection of Darwinian capitalism strike progressive notes that create difficulties for Catholic politicians in this country who until now have looked to a reliably reactionary Vatican to support their conservative views.
Republican presidential hopeful Jeb Bush showed something less than the zeal of a convert in offhandedly dismissing the thoughts from his pastor in chief.
"I hope I'm not going to get castigated for saying this by my priest back home, but I don't get economic policy from my bishops or my cardinals or my pope," Bush said on the campaign trail in New Hampshire. "I think religion ought to be about making us better as people, less about things (that) end up getting into the political realm."
Other Republican hopefuls who are Catholic -- Marco Rubio, Rick Santorum, Bobby Jindal, Chris Christie -- have distanced themselves from the pope's message  or will likely do so when given the opportunity. As Bush implied, they will no doubt reject his thoughts on the economy and financial system as well. But in the pope's view they are all inextricably linked.
"The lessons of the global financial crisis have not been assimilated, and we are learning all too slowly the lessons of environmental deterioration," Francis wrote. He minced no words, saying it is "remarkable" how weak the political responses -- to the financial crisis, to climate change -- have been.
"The failure of global summits on the environment make it plain that our politics are subject to technology and finance," he says in the encyclical. "There are too many special interests, and economic interests easily end up trumping the common good and manipulating information so that their own plans will not be affected."
Ironically, it is Sanders, who is Jewish and who called the pope a "miracle for humanity" in a television interview Friday, who was the first of the presidential candidates to wholeheartedly embrace the pope's message.
It remains to be seen if the head of the Roman church has also struck a chord with a majority of Americans, who may well be ahead of their politicians in their concern for the environment and their dissatisfaction with the inequality resulting from an economy of greed.
Francis used the megaphone of the papacy to broadcast a message on the environment and the economy that will have repercussions in our own politics. As the 2016 election approaches, candidates will ignore it at their peril.
Delamaide has reported on business and economics from New York, Paris, Berlin and Washington for Dow Jones news service, Barron's, Institutional Investor and Bloomberg News service, among others. 




What's lost in climate arguments; If nature causes warming, humans need to understand it to defend Earth



Nature is holding America hostage. Unrelenting drought in the Southwest, storms of record strength across Texas -- the signs are all around. Everyone wants to know: Where will nature strike next? Well, everyone except some in Congress.
Understanding our Earth is an increasingly a low priority. As next year's  spending legislation progresses, we've seen proposed cuts of 18%-32% for the Earth sciences components of NASA. It is widely believed that these deep cuts reflect objections to climate change research.
The missing logic here is that society's need to understand nature has many facets. The rancorous debate about human influence has obscured this. Indeed, those who reject a human contribution should be first in line clamoring to understand nature's role in climate variability.
Man vs. nature
For argument's sake, take the apparent perspective of many in Congress: The prevailing view of the scientific community (that humans are largely responsible for recent long-term climate change) is wrong, and nature is instead the cause. If so, something curious must be occurring. The warming anticipated from human greenhouse gases must somehow be counteracted by  complex natural mechanisms. We would be fortunate if this were the case; it would imply Earth is watching out for us.
Don't cheer too quickly. Over the past century, Earth has warmed at a rate not seen for thousands of years. If we humans are not the cause,  something critical to the complex environmental system that enables  life must be acting up -- the sun, the oceans, perhaps even Earth's magnetic field. What is it? The troubling answer, should we take Congress' perspective, is nobody cares.
This is unsettling. Climate scientists are sometimes accused of fear-mongering. They predict that changes observed in recent decades -- warming temperatures, rising seas, vanishing glaciers, receding Arctic sea ice and more -- could worsen in coming years due to human activity. Yet taking the perspective that nature is behind it all, and that we have no need to understand how or why, should scare us more.
Congress aside, we know it is not all nature.  Humans do play a central role. But the uncomfortable lesson of this little skeptical exercise is that those who accept a human role and those who don't have more in common than we like to believe. Nature's own climate fickleness needs to be understood, one way or the other.
If, how, when, why
Why is our understanding so incomplete?  Nature's variability often takes place on time scales longer than modern observations cover. Our few ocean buoys provide insufficient sampling to fully understand circulation patterns. Even our ability to investigate the sun's workings is still new. Without better understanding of what makes Earth tick today, we'll struggle to anticipate what might happen even the next decade.
Various natural phenomena can cause climate change: volcanic eruptions, fluctuations in ocean currents, variations in the sun's output, even increased cloudiness due to cosmic rays. Though they can't explain long-term global warming trends, such natural mechanisms could be candidates to alter climate significantly in the future. We just don't know if, how, when or why they might do so. That's concerning.
We won't ever know without more science. Some people like to point out that "nature is always changing" and that "climate follows natural cycles" -- implying that we have no need to explore why. They expect us to rely on accumulated human experience, rather than science, for predicting the future. Superstorm Sandy showed that such reliance could have devastating consequences. Many decades of experience supported the belief that Atlantic hurricanes rarely turn inland around New York City. Fortunately, our scientific models warned us that Sandy would be a rare exception. Had we relied on experience rather than models, we would all have reacted nonchalantly as Sandy bore down.
We need to reframe the climate debate. We can't be passive in the face of nature's climate influences any more than we can with human activities. Those who accept a human role, and those who don't, share a common stake in the  goal to predict all change -- and the societal imperative to protect us from the risks of failing to do so. Let's all -- Congress included -- step up to this goal.
William Gail's book Climate Conundrums: What the Climate Debate Reveals About Us has been recently released. He is a past president of the American Meteorological Society and co-founder of Global Weather Corp. in Boulder, Colo. 




Bumblebees stung by climate change



Across Europe and North America, wild bumblebees are vanishing from the southern edges of their territories, according to a new study of 67 species published in this week's issue of the journal Science.
The bees are also passing up the opportunity to venture farther north, where temperatures have risen. As a result, bumblebees -- vital pollinators already struggling to fend off disease and habitat loss -- are being inexorably squeezed into smaller and smaller home ranges.
"These species are at serious and immediate risk of rapid human-induced climate change," University of Ottawa's Jeremy Kerr, the leader of the study, told reporters Wednesday. "This is a huge loss, and it has happened very quickly."
The seemingly fragile butterfly has adapted to warming by flapping northward into previously unexplored territory, and many birds have done the same. So Kerr and his colleagues decided to see whether bumblebees were also rolling with the climate punches. The researchers compiled a database of some half a million bumblebee sightings over more than a century, then compared sightings before and after 1974.
Despite warming of nearly 5 degrees in northern regions, bumblebees failed to push northward into newly toasty areas. Instead they only disappeared from southerly places that became too hot, some retreating nearly 200 miles from what had been their southernmost border.
Bumblebees are being crushed "in a kind of climate vise," Kerr said. "They just aren't colonizing new areas and establishing new populations fast enough to track rapid, human-caused climate change."
It's not clear why the bees don't push northward, but the researchers note that the bees evolved in cool, not tropical, places, so their biochemical machinery may be creaky at sweaty temperatures. The researchers did not find a link between the shrinkage of the bees' sanctuaries and changes in land use. Nor did they link the bees' retreat with pesticide use in the United States.
"Maybe they will move in the future" on their own, Kerr said. But "to date, and despite a lot of warming, it has not happened." 




Frackphobics sabotage our climate; If you care about the environment, protect it by using natural gas



It is hard to remember now, but it wasn't long ago that natural gas was seen as a critical tool to fight global warming and protect the environment. That's one reason a new report released this month shows that natural gas has eclipsed coal as the largest U.S. source of electricity for the first time.
Environmental groups used to call gas a "bridge fuel" away from coal to renewables. The Sierra Club was so enthusiastic that it accepted $25 million in funding from oil and gas interests to pay for part of its "Beyond Coal" campaign, according to Time.
But a few years later, the environmental movement reversed itself. Recently, the National Resources Defense Council successfully lobbied for a ban on fracking -- the practice of cracking open underground oil and gas formations with water, sand and chemicals -- for natural gas in New York state. The Sierra Club abruptly ended its alliance with the industry and announced a "Beyond Natural Gas" campaign.
Gas next door
What changed? Gas became cheap and abundant thanks to fracking. And where conventional natural gas production was historically centered in the oil patch, shale gas is often present in places such as upstate New York, where a lot more environmentalists live. As a result, while gas remains the state's No. 1 source of electricity, its production there has been effectively banned.
Fearing that cheap gas would slow down the transition to renewable energy, environmental leaders now claim that fracking is contaminating water wells and depleting aquifers, and that leaking gas makes fracking worse for global warming than coal.
In reality, gas remains a vastly superior source of energy than coal by virtually every environmental metric -- just as it was a decade ago. That's because coal is a dirty sponge rock. Burning it emits mercury, a toxic heavy metal, and sulfur dioxide, which causes acid rain. You have to literally blow the tops off of mountains to get the stuff. Whole river watersheds in West Virginia are buried under toxic debris. This month, thanks in part to natural gas, new federal statistics show that mountaintop mining is down 62% since 2008.
Natural gas is so clean, we burn it in our kitchens. It emits practically no mercury and 17 to 40 times less sulfur dioxide, according to our study with the Breakthrough Institute. As for water, simply switching electricity production from coal to natural gas saves 25 to 50 times more water.
Critics claim these benefits are not being realized because gas has displaced renewable energy and nuclear power instead of coal. In reality, more than 90% of the growth in gas-fired generation since the onset of the shale gas revolution in 2005 has replaced coal-fired generation.
Wind, solar need gas
Wind and solar energy depend on natural gas to keep the lights on when the sun isn't shining and the wind isn't blowing, which is about two-thirds or more of the time on average. Without natural gas, utilities would have to ramp coal plants up and down rapidly to fill in for the wind and sun. When coal plants make rapid changes to their output, they get even dirtier.
A study at the University of Texas-Austin, meanwhile, found that the amount of natural gas that leaks during its production has decreased. Even if methane leak rates were substantially higher, there would be little climate impact because it is a short-lived greenhouse gas.
The main event when it comes to the fight against global warming is still carbon dioxide, and there are few better ways to reduce carbon emissions than replacing coal plants with gas turbines.
Fracking, of course, does not come without environmental costs. But the real impacts of fracking are felt locally. In places such as Pennsylvania and Colorado, fracking is industrializing rural landscapes. The rigs, pipelines and truck traffic are changing bucolic landscapes. Local communities are struggling to balance quality of life with the rights of landowners to exploit their mineral resources and the need for development in struggling communities. These are legitimate debates, probably best addressed locally,  but even then, we should not forget the larger context.
Ultimately, how America navigates the fracking war will say a lot about how clean our air will be and how much carbon we will emit. Energy transitions come slowly. Developing a truly zero-carbon energy system will take decades. In the meantime, despite local impacts, gas can bring us great environmental benefits.
Michael Shellenberger and Ted Nordhaus, founders of the Breakthrough Institute, are authors of An Ecomodernist Manifesto. 




13 firms back plan for climate change; Apple, Walmart, GM among those offering support for Obama



The Obama administration recruited some big-name corporate help Monday to help push its climate change plans in the United States and across the globe.
Thirteen major companies -- from Alcoa to Walmart -- made anti-pollution commitments that mirror the president's plans and agreed to back the administration's efforts at climate change talks later this year.
"They're setting an example for their peers and their industries," White House senior adviser Brian Deese said.
In making what the White House calls the American Business Act on Climate Pledge, companies agree to reduce their carbon emissions and invest in more clean-energy alternatives, the White House said in a statement.
In addition to Alcoa and Walmart, other participants are Apple, Bank of America, Berkshire Hathaway Energy, Cargill, Coca-Cola, General Motors, Goldman Sachs, Google, Microsoft, PepsiCo and UPS.
Their commitments add up to more than $140 billion in "new low-carbon investment" and more than 1,600 megawatts of new renewable energy, the White House said in a statement.
Company leaders met Monday at the White House with Secretary of State John Kerry and other administration officials.
The 13 companies also agreed to support the Obama administration as it seeks a global climate change deal later this year in Paris.
Republicans said it's fine for companies to explore energy alternatives voluntarily but that Obama's policies will put excessive burdens on small businesses. Cory Fritz, a spokesman for House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, said the private sector "creates growth, opportunities and environmental progress" better than any government.
Obama has pushed his climate change agenda through executive actions, including new restrictions on power plants, and with bilateral agreements. Last year, the United States and China announced a bilateral efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Overall, the administration's climate change plan "will cut nearly 6 billion tons of carbon pollution through 2030, an amount equivalent to taking all the cars in the United States off the road for more than four years," the White House said. 




Drought: A global issue; On four continents, historic droughts wreak record-breaking havoc



California's historic drought appears to be matched by severe dry spells on three other continents. Brazil, North Korea and South Africa bear the brunt of much lower-than-average precipitation, which wreaks havoc on millions of people's lives and livelihoods.
Although causes vary, the chance of more intense droughts in the future as a result of man-made climate change is increasing as regional extremes of precipitation -- both more and less -- remain likely, according to the United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Every drought is unique, said Peter Gleick, president of the Pacific Institute, a global water think tank in Oakland. "The same drought in California would have very different impacts in other countries," he said.
What's considered a drought in Bali, Indonesia -- where six days without rain is unusual -- would  not be considered a drought in Libya, where annual rainfall is just 7 inches, the National Drought Mitigation Center reported.
In some places, such as the Middle East,  drought is  a permanent part of life because of  chronic lack of water, making desalination and the reuse of wastewater  more commonplace, said Charles Iceland of the D.C.-based World Resources Institute. Tracking droughts globally is difficult: No country outside the USA has made a comprehensive effort to monitor them.
CALIFORNIA
The Golden State's  water infrastructure system -- the most extensive in the world -- is being put to the test by its worst drought in 40 years, Gleick said.
California's drought has brought unprecedented water shortages, increased threats to wildlife and crops, higher electric bills and huge economic losses.
As of Thursday's U.S. Drought Monitor, 97% of the state is enduring some level of drought. Each of the state's 12 reservoirs is at a level far below average, as are streams.
Above-average precipitation during the past 90 days in parts of central and Southern California and the Sierra have not reduced the overall drought conditions in these areas because they are still so abnormally dry, the drought monitor reported.
The state is hoping that a predicted strong El Nio will deliver a blast of rain and snow to the state this winter, but too much too quickly can lead to flooding and mudslides as the water just runs off the rock-hard ground.
BRAZIL
The South American nation's worst drought in 50 years impacts a fifth of Brazil's 200million people, including those in the megacities of So Paulo and Rio de Janeiro. Brazil is "really suffering," Gleick said. "It's pushing its infrastructure to the limit," he said.
Though Brazil has a decent system of dams and reservoirs, no human-built infrastructure is adequate if the drought is extreme enough, Gleick said. So Paulo, Brazil's largest city, is running on emergency reserves of water and has started rationing because of the lack of precipitation, the Global Drought Information System reported.
Water in Brazilian cities and reservoirs is extremely polluted, Iceland said, meaning access to clean water even in rainy times is challenging. The drought makes that situation even worse.
What little water is left in the rivers and reservoirs is "just about unusable in its current state," Iceland said. "In Brazil, wastewater is not treated and just dumped into rivers, which are almost like open sewers."
SOUTH AFRICA
In Africa, the worst drought in more than 20 years -- in some areas since 1992 -- continues to intensify in the equatorial region and remains entrenched in South Africa, which is seeing its worst dry spell in two decades, Global Drought Information System said. The United Nations said this year's food production for much of central and southern Africa is likely to be far lower than last year because of the drought.
South Africa's government said the eastern province of KwaZulu-Natal is in especially bad shape. Water shortages have reached "crisis levels," the government said in a statement.
The country has been forced to import corn (maize) this year, rather than export it as it usually does, the U.N. World Food Program reported. "South Africa, the largest producer in the region, accounting for more than 40% of regional maize output -- has estimated a maize production fall of 32% below last year's harvest," WFP spokeswoman Jane Howard said in an email. "There are concerns that there could be significant food supply shortages in coming months," she said.
Several dams are at critically low levels, forcing mandatory water cutbacks in some areas. Water is supplied to some communities by trucks.
"The situation ... is a very serious one," South African  official Nomusa Dube-Ncube said. "There are no signs of rain coming. We are praying."
NORTH KOREA
The drought in North Korea is extremely difficult to track or verify, because of the lack of accurate information that comes out of the reclusive nation.
The country said it is undergoing its worst drought in a century, and the United Nations warns of mass starvation because many of the areas affected by the dry conditions produce staple food crops.
Deaths of young children increased markedly in the first six months of the year in the drought-affected provinces, the U.N. Children's Fund reported.
"The situation is urgent," UNICEF Regional Director Daniel Toole said in a statement  this month. "But if we act now -- by providing urgently needed expertise and pre-positioning supplies -- we can save lives."
The country is experiencing electric shortages because the drought is reducing hydroelectric generation capacity, the Global Drought Information System reported.
Of all the countries in the world, North Korea is one of the least capable of dealing with drought, Gleick said.
"The ability of a region to withstand drought depends on its connections with the rest of the world," he said. 




Obama to cut more carbon emissions; Climate change effort will face opposition



The Obama administration is set to announce steeper-than-expected cuts in carbon pollution from power plants, part of a stepped-up push to emphasize climate change in the weeks ahead.
The new Clean Power Plan -- certain to be challenged in the courts and in the Republican Congress -- will require power plants to reduce carbon emissions by 32% from 2005 levels between now and 2030.
That's a 9% increase from the rules as proposed a year ago, according to the White House.
In a video announcing the revamped plan, Obama called it "the biggest, most important step we've ever taken to combat climate change."
The revamped rules will be formally released Monday, Obama said.
The plan also calls for a faster transition to renewable energy sources by 2030.
Obama plans to sell this and other climate change plans in a series of high-profile events over the next several months.
He plans to address a National Clean Energy Summit in Nevada and will become the first president to visit the Arctic area of Alaska.
Climate change will also be a major topic when Obama meets with Pope Francis at the White House in September.
Later this year, Obama aides and government officials from other countries will negotiate the details of a global climate agreement.
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., and other Republicans have said that Obama's proposed emission cuts are unrealistic and will slow business growth and job creation.
Members of the energy industry have  announced plans to sue over the new emission cut rules, saying the administration lacks the legal authority to impose them.
In his video, Obama said that climate change is causing hotter summers, rising sea levels, longer wildfires and more destructive extreme weather events, and is contributing to more asthma cases.
The administration has moved in previous years to limit greenhouse gas emission for cars, trucks and heavy-duty vehicles.
Yet, Obama said in the White House video, "existing power plants can still dump unlimited amounts of harmful carbon pollutants into the air we breathe."
Contributing: Jordan Joynt 




Climate plan becomes torch in '16 race; 'This is our moment to get this right,' Obama says as presidential hopefuls take sides



Combating climate change will protect the nation's economy, security and health, President Obama said Monday in unveiling a plan designed to reduce power plant emissions and fated to be a major 2016 campaign issue.
"This is our moment to get this right and leave something better for our kids," he  said about  his "Clean Power Plan." A major plank in Obama's overall climate change agenda, the plan immediately became a fault line in the emerging fight to succeed him as president.
Democratic presidential candidates praised the plan as a good way to confront the challenges of climate challenge; Republicans cast it as over-regulation that will reduce jobs and inflate utility bills and vowed to change it if elected.
"There is such a thing as being too late when it comes to climate change," Obama said, blaming it for stronger storms, deeper droughts and longer-lasting wildfire seasons.
Levels of carbon dioxide are at their highest in 800,000 years, Obama said, causing more cases of asthma and other diseases -- especially among children -- and threatening national security. There are restrictions on other toxic chemicals, Obama said, but "there have never been federal limits on the amount of carbon that power plants can dump into the air."
Though Obama laid out a stark vision of what could happen if no actions are taken, the next president will have a say on how -- and if -- Obama's proposed emission reductions are enforced.
New requirements -- including the major one that carbon emissions be reduced 32% by the year 2030, relative to 2005 levels -- kick in after Obama leaves office on Jan. 20, 2017.
The Clean Power Plan will be the subject of lawsuits from energy interests who say the government is exceeding its authority with a "war on coal."
In praising the president's plan, Hillary Clinton -- front-runner for the Democratic nomination in 2016 -- said it "drives investments in clean energy and energy efficiency, reduces asthma attacks and premature deaths and promotes a healthier environment and a stronger economy."
It is a "floor, not the ceiling," Clinton said, vowing to go further with pollution restrictions and other climate change projects if she is elected.
Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, also seeking the Democratic nomination, said the plan sounds "like a step forward in ending our dependence on fossil fuel, and I support that effort."
Republican presidential candidates took a different tack.
"The rule runs over state governments, will throw countless people out of work and increases everyone's energy prices," said former Florida governor Jeb Bush.
Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker said Obama should call his project the "Costly Power Plan," saying "it will cost hardworking Americans jobs and raise their energy rates." Walker, like other GOP candidates, vowed to stop it if elected.
Congressional Republicans also criticized the plan. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., noted that GOP lawmakers are moving to block the new regulations. Rather than work with Congress on "energy diversification, this White House seems to want good politics, not good policy," McConnell said.
Contributing: Chrissie Thompson 




It's the hour of power for Detroit's muscle cars; Climate change and gas prices aside, a new generation rises



The golden age of the muscle car is now.
Despite strict emissions limits, concerns about climate change and unpredictable gasoline prices that would make a '60s hot rodder pull over and weep, Detroit's modern performance cars could run rings around the classics. And they're surprisingly affordable when compared with price tags of some exotic cars with similarly high-performing engines.
"Back in the 1960s and '70s, we were looking at 300-, 325-horsepower engines. Now you've got 500-, 600-, even 700-horsepower," said Ken Gross, an automotive historian, museum consultant and journalist. "Never in my lifetime did I think I'd see the day when I could drive a 700-horsepower street car."
Even the least powerful of today's sporty cars -- say a base V-6 Chevy Camaro, Mustang or Charger -- could probably out-corner most 1960s muscle cars, which were renowned for their ability to accelerate, but not to turn or stop.
"We are living in the Golden Age of the performance car," said Matt Anderson, curator of transportation at the Henry Ford Museum and Greenfield Village. "The cars from the 1960s and '70s were good cars, but basic. Not as fast or sophisticated as today's cars. With new technology, improving fuel economy and reasonable gasoline prices, there's no end in sight."
Fiat Chrysler's Dodge Hellcat engines cram 707 horsepower into the Challenger coupe and Charger sedan.
The 2016 Chevrolet Corvette ZO6 produces 650 horsepower and accelerates to 60 mph in 2.95 seconds. Watching one launch has more in common with the Millennium Falcon shifting into warp drive than the Corvettes Chevrolet sold when muscle cars and Star Wars were new.
Ford is about to join the party with the 526-horsepower Shelby GT 350 Mustang, which uses a radically designed V-8 engine of a type usually reserved for six-figure exotic cars from Porsche and Ferrari.
There are less powerful, and less expensive versions of those extreme models of the Challenger, Charger, Corvette and Mustang.
Affordability was part of what drove the first muscle car boom, and it's a major selling point for Detroit's modern performance cars. Prices for the Shelby GT 350 start at $49,170. You can get into a Challenger Hellcat or Charger Hellcat for $58,295 or $62,295, respectively.
Performance cars have become big fun and good business. The first muscle car boom died because of high fuel prices, insurance costs and strict emissions limits. The new generation is among the few classes of vehicles bucking the industry trend away from cars in favor of pickups and SUVs.
Performance cars have been among the three most-researched vehicle types on car-shopping website Autotrader for at least the last 10 months, alongside pickups and midsize SUVs. 




EPA proposes huge methane limits; Agency affirms its commitment to cutting pollution that contributes to climate change by targeting oil, gas industry's emissions



The Environmental Protection Agency released proposed standards  Tuesday for reducing methane and other pollutants from oil and gas operations in the USA.
The rules require extensive cutting of methane emissions, finding and repairing leaks at oil and gas wells and capturing natural gas emitted from hydraulic fracturing.
Methane --  25 times more powerful than carbon dioxide at trapping atmospheric heat -- is a contributor to global warming.
The proposal also aims to reduce volatile organic compound  emissions, such as benzene and xylene, that can lead to respiratory and cardiovascular ailments.
"Through our cost-effective proposed standards, we are underscoring our commitment to reducing the pollution fueling climate change and protecting public health while supporting responsible energy development, transparency and accountability," EPA Administrator Gina McCarthy said in a statement.
The proposal is part of President Obama's Climate Action Plan to cut methane emissions from the oil and gas sector by 40% to 45% from 2012 levels by 2025, the EPA said.
The oil and gas industry is the USA's largest single source of methane in the atmosphere, followed by livestock emissions and landfills, according to the EPA. Overall, methane accounts for nearly 9% of  greenhouse gas emitted as a result of human activity in the USA.
The EPA estimated the rule would cost the oil and gas industry $320 million to $420 million in 2025, and reduced health care costs and other benefits would total $460 million to $550 million, according to the Associated Press.
Environmental groups applauded the plan.
"Curbing the oil and gas industry's rampant methane pollution problem is the next biggest thing the White House can do to fight climate change after addressing carbon pollution from power plants,"  Meleah Geertsma, senior attorney at the Natural Resources Defense Council, said in a statement.
The  House Committee on Natural Resources was less complimentary.
"The EPA's plan ...  flies in the face of technological reality," Chairman Rob Bishop, R-Utah, said in a statement. 




July was hottest month ever



July was the hottest recorded month worldwide -- and it comes at a time when worries over man-made global warming are reaching a boiling point.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said Thursday that the temperature in July, when averaged around the planet, was 61.86 degrees. That's the hottest since records began  in 1880. July is typically the hottest month of the year. The previous hottest months were in July 1998 and July 2010.
Bandar Mahshahr, Iran, set one of the most extreme heat records   July 31. The air temperature of 115, combined with a dew point of 90 degrees, created a heat index of 165, NOAA said.
The NOAA announcement comes on the same day  the American Geophysical Union released a study saying that man-made global warming has made California's historic drought 15-20% worse than it would have been otherwise. California could face nearly permanent drought conditions by the second half of this century, the study said.
The warming temperatures  make the drought worse because the  heat draws moisture out of plants and soil. "A lot of people think that the amount of rain that falls ... is the only thing that matters" in a drought, said lead author A. Park Williams at Columbia University. "But (global) warming changes the baseline amount of water that's available to us, because it sends water back into the sky" through evaporation.
The USA and parts of west Asia didn't see  extreme heat in July, though the U.S. saw a warmer-than-average July. 



Obama to speak 'frankly' on 11-day climate change tour



President Obama will log more than 14,000 miles on Air Force One over the next 11 days in a tour on climate change  that will take him from the desert West to the Gulf of Mexico to the Arctic Circle.
In Las Vegas, New Orleans and in the small Alaska fishing village of Kotzebue, Obama will deliver a three-pronged message: The U.S. needs to increase the use of alternative energy sources, make coastal communities more resilient and urge a global response to climate change.
The three major climate-themed events are part of an  effort by Obama to speak "frequently and frankly" about the issue over his second term, said Brian Deese, a senior Obama adviser who handles environmental and energy issues for the White House.
They come three weeks after the White House launched a plan for cutting greenhouse gas emissions by 32% over 25 years.
In Las Vegas on Monday night, Obama was likely  to tout new executive actions to make alternative energy sources more affordable in a speech to the National Clean Energy Summit. On Monday, the Department of Energy announced it would issue $1billion in loan guarantees for "distributed energy" projects -- technologies that allow consumers to generate their own electricity or obtain it from a nearby source.
The idea, officials said, was not just to invest in new technologies, but to make it easier for those technologies to get a foothold in the market. For example, the Federal Housing Administration announced a policy Monday that will allow the buyer of an energy-efficient home to assume the cost of those improvements through assessments using a federal mortgage.
In New Orleans on Thursday, Obama will mark the 10th anniversary of Hurricane Katrina. And while climate change won't be the sole focus of the trip, Obama is expected to talk about the need to rebuild from disasters in ways that make communities more resistant to the effects of rising seas, more frequent storms, deeper droughts and increased wildfires.
"We've all tremendously increased our focus on how we build our modern infrastructure to be more resilient to all kinds of risks, including that of extreme weather," Energy Secretary Ernest Moniz said.
In a three-day trip to Alaska next week, Obama will crisscross the state, visiting the villages of Seward, Dellingham and Kotzebue to meet with local communities -- including Alaska Natives -- about the effect that melting glaciers and softening permafrost are having.
His visit to Kotzebue, a largely Inupiat native village 33 miles above the Arctic Circle on the edge of the Chukchi Sea, will mark the northernmost trek of any sitting president of the United States.
"I'm going because Alaskans are on the front lines of one of the greatest challenges we face this century: climate change," Obama said in a video released by the White House.
"It's our wake-up call. The alarm bells are ringing, and as long as I'm president, America will lead the world to meet this threat before it's too late."
He'll address the State Department's Conference on Global Leadership in the Arctic, also known as the Glacier Conference, which is bringing together leaders from Arctic nations to grapple with climate issues.
The Arctic trip also highlights some of the tensions in Obama's energy policy. Environmental groups have been sharply critical of the Interior Department's granting of permits to Royal Dutch Shell to drill for oil in the Arctic Ocean, with the final permit coming last week.
Deese brushed off that criticism Monday, saying Shell was operating under a lease granted under the George W. Bush administration, and the Obama administration had delayed and narrowed the permit, allowing a single well with "unprecedented, high levels of safety standards for Shell or any other company to meet." 




New Orleans is safer, but it's not safe


As soon as next week or maybe not for years, an unremarkable tropical depression will form  off the coast of Africa, strengthen into a hurricane as it moves across the Atlantic and then slash into the Gulf of Mexico and take aim at New Orleans, the way Katrina did 10 years ago this week.
The city has been mauled repeatedly by vicious storms over the centuries, and thanks to climate change, the risk has only grown. But the huge effort to prevent a repeat of Katrina's destruction -- more than 80% of the city underwater and more than 1,800 dead throughout the region, including on the devastated Mississippi Gulf Coast -- has vastly improved the city's chances the next time around.
If all goes according to plan, the kind of storm surge that broke flood walls inside the city and put neighborhoods under as much as 20 feet of water would be slowed or stopped by a huge new wall designed to keep it away from the city's inner defenses. And though water from a storm as big as Katrina could still "overtop" the rebuilt and strengthened system, new designs would keep the water from dissolving the earthen levees and allowing the flood walls to buckle.
Before Katrina, much of the primary hurricane protection was, literally, at people's back doors, including the impressive looking but fragile flood walls along the Industrial Canal in the city's Lower Ninth Ward. When the flood walls gave way, the water only had to cross the street to push houses off their foundations. Now the robust new outer wall and gates at the mouths of the canals that poke into the city are designed to keep the worst pressure off the last-line defenses.
"Some people would still get wet, but we would not expect the catastrophic failure that flooded" most of the city on Aug. 29, 2005, says Mark Davis, a Tulane University environmental expert. That's not to say that more than $14 billion in federal money and years of building by the Army Corps of Engineers have solved New Orleans' hurricane problem. "We're safer," Davis says, "but we're not safe."
The goal in restoring the city's hurricane defenses was to protect it from a 100-year storm -- a storm with a 1% chance of occurring in any given year. But that's an insurance number, the threshold that allows people to get home insurance and mortgages.
Katrina was anywhere from a 150-year storm to a 500-year storm, depending on who ranks it. While the new system would lessen the impact of a 500-year storm, the city would still be damaged. The White House recently ordered federal agencies to plan for 500-year storms. That's a smart standard for New Orleans, but it is years and even more billions of dollars away.
The major unfinished business is rebuilding the natural buffer between New Orleans and the Gulf of Mexico, where wetlands, barrier islands and ridges once absorbed some of the force of hurricanes before they reached the city.
Land built up over centuries by the natural flooding of the sediment-rich Mississippi River has been lost as levees tamed regular flooding and canals cut through the wetlands, helping turn them back into open water at the rate of a football field every hour, and 17 square miles every year.
After Katrina, state officials drew up a long-term plan that includes restoring that buffer, and while the $50 billion price is a tough ask in Washington, it's cheap compared with the more than $100 billion it cost to help put the region back together after Katrina. "Like everybody says, pay me now or pay me later," says former Louisiana Democratic senator Mary Landrieu, who struggled for years to get some of the billions in oil and gas revenue from federal lands offshore Louisiana dedicated to rebuilding the state's defenses.
Complacency is not an option. The entire region is gradually sinking at the same time sea levels are rising. By the end of this century, the combined effect could put some parts of the region at least 4 feet below sea level, according to government estimates. As robust as the flood walls and levees are today, they'll be less and less able to protect the city over time.
There's no feasible alternative except to try. New Orleans and the surrounding area are home to more than a million people, the site of a crucial port, and a huge and irreplaceable part of the nation's energy production. Even if it were possible to move, the disruption and cost would be far more than what it would take to protect the region.
Besides, protecting New Orleans is just the beginning. As Hurricane Sandy showed in 2012, New York City is dangerously vulnerable to flooding. So are Miami and other cities along the Atlantic and the Gulf of Mexico.
The nation can't simply abandon its coastal cities. One by one, beginning with New Orleans, the United States will have to figure out how to keep them safe -- and how to pay for it. 




Study: Risk of large wildfires rises



This year's catastrophic wildfire season -- more than 7.6 million acres already burned -- could be just a glimpse at what the future holds.
The risk of so-called "very large wildfires" could increase as much as six times in the U.S. by mid-century as a result of man-made global warming, researchers concluded in a study announced by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration on Wednesday.
"Very large fires" are defined as the top 10% of fires based on acreage. Such blazes account for the majority of burned acres across the U.S. each year. There are currently 66 large fires burning, a step down from "very large."
Climate change is expected to both intensify fire-friendly weather conditions -- such as heat and drought -- and lengthen the season during which these fires tend to spread, according to the study, which was published in the International Journal of Wildland Fire.
Huge sections of the Western U.S. would see the risk of very large fires increase by as much as 200% to 500%.
The highest risk area includes the Great Basin and Northern Rockies, as well as the Sierra Nevada and Northern California.
Scientists in the study used computer models to simulate future climate conditions, based on projections of greenhouse gas emissions from the continued burning of fossil fuels such as coal, oil and gas.
Over the past couple of decades, wildfires have charred more and more of the U.S. Nine of the 10 years with the largest number of acres burned on record have occurred since 2000, according to the National Interagency Fire Center.
Several states, including Washington, Colorado, New Mexico, Texas and Oregon have all seen their largest or most destructive wildfires on record in this decade alone.
A separate study out Wednesday from NASA and several universities showcased global warming's opposite concern: an increased risk of coastal flooding because of a higher than predicted sea-level rise by 2100.
The higher sea levels will lead to flooding of coastal cities around the world. 




Obama undercuts his climate legacy



The Arctic sits at the forefront of a rapidly destabilizing climate, and this week President Obama  traveled there to highlight the urgency of our world's climate crisis. We commend the president for his leadership, and yet this trip comes on the heels of his administration's decision to allow Royal Dutch Shell to drill for oil in the Arctic Ocean, a move that seriously undermines his climate legacy.
Carbon pollution from companies such as Shell, history's sixth largest greenhouse gas polluter, is destroying our climate, and drilling in the Arctic could lock us into runaway climate change -- catastrophic climate change, really.
Rapidly melting ice means previously inaccessible oil and gas is now squarely in Shell's sights. Shell has already sunk $7 billion into oil exploration in the Arctic, a down payment to get a toehold on the region's massive energy reserve. Shell has already called the effort a "game changer" for domestic energy production.
It is a game changer, but not just one for future generations. People are dealing with the impacts of climate change right now. A recent study in the journal Nature found that any development of the sizable reserves of oil and gas underlying the Arctic Ocean will put our planet at risk of extreme climate change.
That's why activists took to kayaks and rappelled from bridges to block Shell's vessels from making it to the Arctic. These brave protesters were holding themselves to the same standard President Obama proposed in his 2014 State of the Union Address: We must be able to look our children's children in the eye and tell them we did "all we could to leave them a safer, more stable world." Each drop of oil that flows from the Arctic makes it that much harder to fulfill this promise.
To avoid worsening our climate catastrophe, we must leave large reserves of fossil fuels where they are and where they belong -- in the ground. Going to further extremes to exploit fossil fuels is the surest sign of our unrelenting addiction. If we can't say no to drilling in the harsh and unpredictable Arctic Ocean, where in the world will we say, enough is enough?
Annie Leonard is executive director of Greenpeace USA. 



Pope Francis to allow priests to forgive abortion; 'Holy Year of Mercy' will begin in December, and pontiff 'is saying that there is no sin that can't be forgiven'



Pope Francis, who has defined his short tenure by taking on controversial issues from gay marriage to climate change, waded into one of the thorniest topics of his papacy Tuesday when he said priests can forgive the "sin of abortion"
In a letter published by the Vatican, Francis said priests will have the power during a special "Holy Year of Mercy" that begins Dec. 8.
"I think it's very significant," said John Thavis, a former Catholic News Service reporter and author of The Vatican Diaries. "Francis is making a bold statement. He is saying that there is no sin that can't be forgiven."
The church considers abortion such a grave moral offense that those who obtain or aid in obtaining abortions are excommunicated. Priests normally need a bishop's approval to grant absolution.
Francis reaffirmed the church's stance against abortion, but he said some women don't comprehend the implications of terminating a pregnancy, or they believe they have no other option.
Experts say it's no coincidence Francis tackled the topic weeks before his first trip as pontiff to the USA.
"Pope Francis knows this is a hot-button issue for American Catholics, that it touches the rawest of nerves in this country," Candida Ross, a theology professor at Notre Dame University, said. "He knows how shrill the language can be here, and he is trying to reset the tone of the conversation before he arrives."
Francis' letter is the latest in a series of efforts to build a more inclusive church.
Last month, the pope issued a call to embrace Catholics who have divorced and remarried, saying such couples "always belong to the church."
In March, he affirmed his opposition to same-sex marriage but said the church could tolerate some forms of civil unions.
A Pew Research Center survey released Wednesday showed high levels of acceptance for non-traditional families by most Catholics. Nine in 10 American Catholics say a family headed by a married mother and father is ideal for raising children, but large majorities say they believe other kinds of families -- such as those led by parents who are single, divorced, unmarried or gay -- are acceptable, the survey found.
In Tuesday's letter, the pope drew on his decades of experience in the church dealing with the issue of abortion. "I know that it is an existential and moral ordeal. I have met so many women who bear in their heart the scar of this agonizing and painful decision," he said.
Jon O'Brien, president of the advocacy group Catholics for Choice, said the Vatican should not expect women to line up seeking absolution.
"Catholic women know that they can in good conscience disagree with the hierarchy and still be good Catholics in good faith," he said.
Carol Tobias, president of the National Right to Life, expressed support for the pope's position. "We welcome the efforts of Pope Francis to bring healing and forgiveness to men and women who have participated in the death of an unborn child," she said.
Thavis said he would not be surprised if the edict stays in effect beyond the Holy Year, which ends Nov. 20, 2016. "If this is meant to demonstrate the church's mercy, it doesn't make much sense that it would have an expiration date," he said. 




Climate change push fails to convince skeptics


TWITTER
We asked what followers thought about President Obama's trip to Alaska to urge a global response to climate change.
It's a wasted trip. There are more important issues he should be addressing.
@tkshemp3
I hope our next president is as committed to the environment. Our lives and livelihoods are at stake!
@RafaAlcalde1
I'm in favor of any solution to climate change that doesn't involve giving money to the government.
@BrooklynCrooner
It's pointless. The  Republicans will oppose anything he does, even if they agree, because it has his stamp.
@Beastwarking
President Obama's trip to Alaska is a waste of time and taxpayer money.
@Evilpa
I commend him for finally taking a step to bring light to this issue in a big way.
@tcahill3391
It's more important than changing the name of Mount McKinley to Denali.
@GHFerdinand
Follow @USATOpinion or #tellusatoday on Twitter for more discussions.
LETTERS
Leave Mount McKinley alone, Mr. President ("Mount McKinley renamed Denali," News, Monday). Tradition and change occur, and honoring a man from Ohio who was president is a wonderful thing! We should honor more public officials and ordinary people in our community.
I grew up knowing the highest mountain in America was Mount McKinley. Will Mount Rushmore be on your hit list, Mr. President? Mount Rushmore was formerly known as the Six Grandfathers by the Sioux.
Nothing is wrong with honoring people of distinction. I happen to like Mount McKinley. Leave it alone.
Jim Delmonte
Honolulu
FACEBOOK
The trip is designed to use Alaska as a backdrop to continue the propaganda on the climate. It is really about more taxes and bigger government, neither of which will affect the climate.
Boodrow Malone
No issue is more important. We are affecting temperatures, sea levels, ocean acidity and more. Meanwhile, many Republicans deny the reality. They reject what the world's scientific institutions have been saying in favor of corporate fossil fuel interests or a political agenda.
Phillip Noe 



Pope Francis' visit is just one ring in the 2016 circus - but it's a big one; His unprecedented address may stump the candidates



For a century, it was the paranoid political fantasy of Protestant fundamentalists and Know-Nothing nativists: The pope -- "the whore of Babylon," they called him, citing the Book of Revelation -- would use Catholic immigrants to bend Washington to his will.
On Sept. 24, when Pope Francis becomes the first pontiff to address a joint session of Congress, there'll be no coup d'etat. But his first U.S. visit could be another wild card in the unpredictable 2016 presidential race, especially if he touches on controversies such as Planned Parenthood funding, global warming, immigration or the Iran nuclear deal.
The unprecedented congressional address has a curious genesis: Francis, a left-leaning pope whom Rush Limbaugh calls a Marxist, was invited by John Boehner, a right-leaning speaker of the House (as well as a proud Catholic and former altar boy).
As a result, conservatives Republicans may have to listen to the pope talk about:
Capitalism: Uncontrolled, it will "devour everything which stands in the way of increased profits," the pope has said, and promote "the idolatry of money.''
Immigration: Francis says immigrants, legal and illegal, are often victims of injustice and deserve support, not the scorn heaped on them by some politicians. He says he considered entering the U.S. from Mexico to show solidarity with immigrants.
Climate change: In an encyclical (papal statement) in June, Francis said global warming was real; partly caused by humans; and a problem governments must address more urgently, despite the costs.
Do Republican members -- four of whom (Ted Cruz, Marco Rubio, Lindsey Graham and Rand Paul) are presidential candidates -- applaud? Sit on their hands? Stick pins in Boehner dolls?
The suspense makes for "fascinating political theater," says Thomas Reese, a Jesuit priest and church observer for The National Catholic Reporter.
He adds: "Boehner must have been crazy to invite him."
'A BRILLIANT POLITICIAN'
It's hard to predict the political impact of the pope's visit. But two things are clear:
1. Francis has strong political views and knows how to express them.
His two predecessors, John Paul II and Benedict XVI, were philosopher-theologians who expressed themselves accordingly. Francis, whose background is science (chemistry), speaks plainly and pointedly. "If you want a five-star, banner headline insight about this pope, here it is," John Allen, a veteran Vatican watcher, wrote this year in The Boston Globe. "Beneath his humble, simple exterior lies the mind of a brilliant politician." The pope's seemingly off-the-cuff remarks, Allen says, are anything but.
Francis has a plan, agrees Austen Ivereigh, one of his biographers. He says the pope believes  "the church has got boxed into a right-wing agenda (gay marriage, abortion, religious freedom) and needs to break out. That means strong messages on immigration, ecology, the death penalty and inequality."
2. When the pope speaks, so must the presidential candidates.
If the pope says anything remotely newsworthy,  journalists  will ask presidential candidates to comment, especially Catholics such as Jeb Bush, Marco Rubio, Martin O'Malley and Chris Christie. That could create what political analyst Nathan Gonzales calls "a domino effect."
Consider how the pope's statement on climate change played out. Rick Santorum, a GOP presidential candidate, is a conservative Catholic who believes faith and values have a place in government. During his 2012 campaign he said John F. Kennedy's 1960 campaign speech to Baptist ministers about separation of church and state -- and about Kennedy's independence, as a Catholic, from the Vatican -- "makes me want to throw up."
But when it became clear that Francis would warn of global warming, Santorum stressed the limits of ecclesiastical authority: "The church has gotten it wrong a few times on science," he said, referring to episodes like the refusal to accept Galileo's proof that the earth circles the sun. "We're probably better off leaving science to the scientists."
At that, former Jesuit seminarian Jerry Brown pounced. "The science is clear," the California governor wrote on Twitter, adding, in reference to the pope's handle: "Get with the @Pontifex."
How to handle a papal hot potato? A candidate "can disagree with the pope, but can't appear to disrespect him," says Patrick Millsaps, Newt Gingrich's 2012 campaign manager.
Although analysts agree the pope will touch on political issues, no one knows how specific he'll be. He could, for instance, call for environmental protection or help for the poor, and leave it at that. Or he could say what government should do. But even so much as a good word for immigrants would rebuke Donald Trump and others who've described them as a problem.
The pope can't appear to favor a candidate. But his selection of topics could help set an  agenda that does. "The pope is not going to tell people what to think. He'll tell them what to think about," says David Campbell, a Notre Dame political scientist and co-author of American Grace: How Religion Divides and Unites Us.
'WHO AM I TO JUDGE?'
Francis' humility, piety and candor have made him a global sensation since his surprise election as pope in March 2013 after Benedict XVI unexpectedly retired. The Argentine immediately became famous for his openness and relative informality. He lived in a modest guesthouse instead of the palatial papal apartments; he telephoned rank-and-file Catholics out of the blue; he took the bus; he tweeted.
Asked about homosexuality, he said, "If someone is gay and he searches for the Lord and has good will, who am I to judge?" He said the church shouldn't speak so insistently -- he used the word "obsessed" -- about  issues like abortion and homosexuality: "We have to find a new balance."
Although almost everything Francis says is news, much of it is not new. Take his comment that the Big Bang theory of the universe's origin is consistent with Catholic teaching; he was merely repeating a position announced in 1951 by Pope Pius XII.
The pope is popular, but his popularity may be slipping. According to a Gallup poll in July, 59% of Americans view the pope favorably, down from 76% in February 2014, and about the same as after he was elected in March 2013. Only 45% of conservatives view him favorably, down from 72% last year.
Can the pope mobilize or shape the Catholic vote?
The Catholic vote isn't what it used to be, says Robert Jones, CEO of the Public Religion Research Institute, a nonpartisan research group. A split has emerged, with white Catholics skewing Republican and Hispanic Catholics reliably Democratic. In 2012, 59% of white Catholics voted for Mitt Romney, while three-quarters of Hispanic Catholics went for Barack Obama. So the "Catholic vote" is really two votes -- neither of them  up for grabs.
POTENTIAL FOR SURPRISE
The plight of conservative Republicans represents something of a turnabout; once, it was liberal Democrats who had to sweat when the pope came to town. When President Bill Clinton welcomed John Paul II to Denver in 1993, there was speculation that the pontiff might rebuke the Democrat for supporting abortion rights.
What happened was more subtle; the pope departed from his prepared text to give the president what John Paul's biographer, George Weigel, called "a history lesson": that the nation was founded on self-evident moral truths, "including every human being's inalienable right to life."
There was no question that when the pope said "right to life" -- a phrase he repeated -- he was talking about abortion.
To call Francis a liberal is to ignore the difference between U.S. and Vatican politics. His unpredictability may add to his allure, according to Jones of the Public Religion Research Institute: "There's always a feeling that the pope just might surprise you."
In that case, congressional Democrats might also be squirming in their seats on Sept. 24. 




Fire risk: Calif. snowpack at lowest level in 500 years



The snowpack in California's Sierra Nevada this year has fallen to its lowest level in at least the past 500 years, according to a study published Monday in Nature Climate Change, a peer-reviewed British journal.
The finding underscores the severe drought afflicting the state, in its fourth year, and raises the prospect of more water shortages that could impact agriculture and hydroelectric power production, and exacerbate wildfires.
"Our study really points to the extreme character of the 2014-15 winter," said study lead author Valerie Trouet of the University of Arizona's Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research.
Where there is usually about 5 feet of snow, there was bare ground at the snow survey site in the Sierra on April 1.
"This is not just unprecedented over 80 years -- it's unprecedented over 500 years," she said.
The Sierra Nevada snowpack plays a critical role in replenishing the state's water reservoirs and provides 30% of the state's water supply, according to the study.
Though actual snowpack measurements have been taken in California over the past few decades, climate scientists need to use other methods, known as proxies, to determine weather patterns for previous centuries.
By looking at the rings of more than 1,500 trees in California and other trees across the West, scientists can tell how much snow fell for each winter over the past five centuries, Trouet said.
"Trees are remarkable. ... They are the best recorder of past climate," she said.
Trees like water, she said, so wide rings signify a wet winter while narrow rings show it was a dry winter.
Trouet used one species of tree -- the blue oak -- to determine precipitation, and a variety of other species to determine temperature. By cross-referencing the  data sets, they could see how much snow fell each winter.
The trees aren't harmed by the testing, as the scientists  bore holes in the tree and pull out a chunk to look at the rings.
"We should be prepared for this type of snow drought to occur much more frequently because of rising temperatures," Trouet said.
She said man-made global warming is making the drought in California more severe. 



Trump spats dominate debate; Back-and-forth jabs take up much of time



Amid the frequent insults -- usually directed by or at Donald Trump -- the Republican presidential debate Wednesday night displayed substantive disagreements on Iran, Russia, taxes, immigration, abortion, marijuana and climate change.
And it demonstrated the diversity of the Republican field, showing the many fault lines among the top tier of 11 GOP candidates: Outsiders versus insiders; business leaders versus politicians; Tea Party stalwarts versus pragmatic moderates; neoconservative hawks versus anti-war globalists; law-and-order prosecutors versus libertarians.
Everyone versus Trump.
Trump got the three-hour debate off to a lively start with an unprovoked attack on Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul, saying Paul "shouldn't even be on this stage. ... He's got 1percent in the polls and how he got up here -- there's far too many people anyway."
Trump's "visceral response to attack people on their appearance -- my goodness, that happened in junior high," Paul shot back.
"I never attacked him on his looks," Trump shot back. "And believe me, there's plenty of subject matter there."
That set the tone for a debate featuring sharp one-liners, personal attacks and intraparty cross-fire, as the crowded field of 11 top-tier candidates jockeyed for attention in a prime-time CNN debate at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library. The moderators of the CNN debate kept the sparks flying by asking the candidates to respond to previous attacks by their opponents.
"If I were sitting at home watching this back and forth, I'd be inclined to turn it off," Ohio Gov. John Kasich complained. "We've just spent the last 10 minutes here ...  with a lot of ad hominem."
Kasich's admonition barely slowed the personal attacks. Former Florida governor Jeb Bush repeatedly attacked Trump for his contributions to Democratic candidates. Trump, who has frequently criticized Bush as "low energy," retorted, "More energy tonight. I like that." (Bush later earned a high-five from Trump for declaring that his Secret Service code name would be Everready. "It's high-energy, Donald.")
Then Carly Fiorina, the former CEO of tech giant HP, and Trump got into a fight over their respective business records. Trump said he would never let Fiorina run one of his businesses; Fiorina accused Trump of driving his casinos into bankruptcy.
Foreign policy dominated the first hour of the debate. Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker said President Obama should cancel next week's state dinner with the leader of China, while Paul and Bush argued that the president has to talk with rivals, including China and Iran.
That issue reflected a division among the Republican field based as much on temperament as on ideology. On Iran, Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas called the nuclear deal negotiated by Obama and five other world powers is "catastrophic" and promised he will rip it to "shreds" if he is president. Kasich agreed that the Iran deal is a bad one but said the next president has to enforce it and make sure Iran lives up to the bargain.
There was agreement on Planned Parenthood after undercover videos appeared to show the organization's executives negotiating the sale of body parts from aborted fetuses. Most candidates said Congress should force Obama to veto a bill defunding it.
"We're fighting with each other up here," New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie said. "Let's ask Hillary Clinton. She believes in the systematic murder of children in the womb to preserve their body parts for sale. ... It's disgusting."
Bush found himself defending the records of his father and brother, who Cruz called the "President Bushes," over their Supreme Court nominees, their handling of the economy and their wars in Iraq. 




What would the pope eat?; I'll be watching to see whether Francis practices what he preaches



In June, Pope Francis released his encyclical: On Care for Our Common Home. In this powerhouse document of both prophetic condemnation of current lifestyles and hope for the possibility of transformation, the pope calls on the faithful to change our lives in ways that will address the interrelated problems of climate change, global poverty and cruelty to animals.
When the Holy Father comes to the USA next week, I'll be following reports to see what he has been eating -- because for people who care about the climate, the poor or animals, the best diet by far is one that's meat-free.
Let's take this step by step.
First, Francis declares that "climate change ... represents one of the principal challenges facing humanity in our day." He says, "Humanity is called to recognize the need for changes of lifestyle, production and consumption, in order to combat this warming."
Eating meat
For the meat industry, animals must be fed a minimum of nine calories in feed grains for each calorie that the animal turns into meat. Because of that inefficiency, about 18% of climate change is attributable to animal agriculture, according to United Nations scientists, which is about 40% more than is caused by all planes, trains, trucks and cars combined.
Environmental scientists in Europe broke down our carbon footprint by meal, and they found that the most efficient meat creates 52 grams of greenhouse gases per calorie, which is 25 times more than legumes, 10 times more than wheat and seven times more than soy.
Second, the pope calls on us "to hear both the cry of the earth and the cry of the poor," declaring that concern for the poor is "an ethical imperative essential for effectively attaining the common good." It's hard to imagine something that is worse for the poor than animal consumption. In a paper  published in the prestigious magazine Environment, two scientists connected the dots related to the inefficiency of meat production and the effect on global poverty.
They found that growing crops to feed them to animals creates competition for land, water and food between farm animals and the global poor. They also found that small-scale farmers in the developing world "are expelled from their land, which is given to a large soy plantation to grow large amounts of animal feed to export to industrialized countries." The authors conclude that "shifting diets toward more vegetarian and vegan meals (coupled with reducing the 20%-25% of food waste in the whole food chain) should rank as one of the leading focal themes for sustainability policy."
Creatures of this world
Finally, the area of the encyclical that has gotten the least attention is Francis' call for compassion toward animals.
In a few examples, from among dozens, the pope declares that "other living beings have a value of their own in God's eyes," and that "each must be cherished with love and respect."
He vigorously denounces cruelty, stating that "it is contrary to human dignity to cause animals to suffer or die needlessly," and that "the Bible has no place for a tyrannical anthropocentrism unconcerned for other creatures."
To focus on the link between concern for the poor and concern for animals, Francis explains that Mary, the mother of Jesus, "grieves for the sufferings of the crucified poor and for the creatures of this world laid waste by human power." When the pope combines concern for animals and the poor, and invokes Mary in doing so, you know he's serious. But animals on modern farms are confined in spaces that do not allow them even to turn around. They are bred and drugged to grow so quickly that many cannot even walk.
Just one example: Animal scientists from the University of Arkansas explain that were a human child to grow as quickly as a modern chicken, she would weigh 660 pounds by the time she was two months old. In modern agriculture, cruelty is the norm, not the exception.
Perhaps most remarkable is Francis' call for personal action to address the tripartite evils of climate change, poverty and cruelty to animals. Specifically, Francis wants us "to dare to turn what is happening to the world into our own personal suffering and thus to discover what each of us can do about it."
Nothing we do on a daily basis has more of an adverse impact on climate change, the global poor or animals than our decision of whether to eat meat.
So when the pope comes to America, I'll be watching what he eats -- to see whether he practices what he preaches.
Bruce Friedrich is director of policy for Farm Sanctuary. 




Tense topics are on agenda for Xi and Obama as presidents meet; Cyberattacks, climate, economy will be discussed



After what figures to be a pleasant meeting with Pope Francis this week, President Obama will face more contentious conversations with a powerful global rival: President Xi Jinping of China.
Hacking, cyber security, military ambitions in Asia and Chinese economic troubles are among the tense topics on the agenda when Obama and Xi meet at the White House on Thursday night and Friday.
Obama and aides are preparing to protest Chinese militarization of the South China Sea and looking for increased cooperation on dealing with climate change.
Xi will visit the White House after months of allegations that the Chinese launched hack attacks against the United States. That includes the theft of personal information about millions of Americans via a hack of the Office of Personnel Management.
"Things have certainly been tense the last few months," said Mira Rapp-Hooper, a senior fellow with the Asian Pacific Security Program at the Center for a New American Security. "It was a complex relationship before. In the last few months, it has only gotten more so."
Obama has hinted at new sanctions on China over cyberattacks. At the same time, officials are looking to strike a deal with China on mutual rules for cyber security, including what Obama has described as an "international framework" designed so the Internet does not become "weaponized."
In a recent speech to corporate executives, Obama said he will address cyberattacks with his Chinese counterpart, including claims that the Chinese are engaged in intellectual property theft.
"We are preparing a number of measures that will indicate to the Chinese that this is not just a matter of us being mildly upset," Obama told the Business Roundtable.
Cyber thefts "will put significant strains on the bilateral relationship," Obama said, and the U.S. government is preparing "some countervailing actions in order to get their attention."
This month in a meeting with troops at Fort Meade, Obama said of the Chinese and cyber security, "We can choose to make this an area of competition -- which, I guarantee you, we'll win if we have to -- or, alternatively, we can come to an agreement in which we say, this isn't helping anybody; let's instead try to have some basic rules of the road in terms of how we operate."
China has denied accusations of hack attacks and accused the United States of spying on it.
China's relations with its neighbors -- particularly U.S. allies such as Japan and South Korea -- will also be a topic of Obama-Xi meetings, which will begin with a private dinner Thursday and continue in discussions Friday.
A major source of contention: a string of artificial islands that China has forged in the South China Sea and stocked with military equipment and airstrips. Other countries in the South China Sea, as well as the United States, see the islands as military provocations.
"We have long encouraged China to find a constructive, diplomatic way to work with other countries that have claims in the South China Sea to try to resolve the differences of opinion there," White House spokesman Josh Earnest said.
Climate change may be a bright spot of this week's plans. U.S. officials are looking for an addition to the climate change agreement the two nations reached in November 2014.
China, where industrial pollution levels are major contributors to the warming of the Earth, would be a key part of any global climate change agreement, the subject of a major world conference later this year.
Also on the agenda: the Iran nuclear deal, Chinese demands to return fugitives that escaped to the USA and a plunge in the Chinese stock market that depressed American markets as well. 




4 Points where Obama and Xi could clash



When President Obama welcomes Chinese President Xi Jinping to the White House this week, the two leaders will seek common ground in their efforts to combat global warming and restrain Iran's nuclear program. Other flash points between the two world powers remain.
Here are four issues Obama and Xi may confront in their talks:
Cyber security
The U.S. and China want to talk about security in cyberspace, but that has a different meaning in each country. In the U.S., it means stopping hacking attacks like the theft of personal information of more than 21million Americans from the Office of Personnel Management, revealed last spring.
China, which denies responsibility for that hack, thinks of cyber security in terms of protecting cyber infrastructure.
"The Chinese are worried about an open Internet and want to control information," said Bonnie Glaser, a China analyst at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
Obama has complained about cyber-related theft of commercial trade secrets by China. The U.S. makes a distinction between industrial espionage, which goes against international business norms, and national security espionage focused on state secrets, which all countries engage in. Chinese officials, who are focused on growing into a great power, "don't buy the distinction," Glaser said.
The economy
Obama and Xi lead the world's two largest economies and want more access to each other's markets. China wants the U.S. to show confidence in China's economy, which has been shaken by slowing growth, a stock market crash and a currency devaluation.
Xi is keen to go home with good news from Washington, said Minxin Pei, an analyst at the German Marshall Fund of the United States. "He needs all the good news he can get," Pei said.
Xi would like a U.S. commitment to include China's currency among the International Monetary Fund's reserve currencies, which would be a major sign of confidence in China's economy, Pei said. The United States wants such a step to include a Chinese commitment to greater transparency of its economy, said Andrew Small, another analyst at the German Marshall Fund.
Both countries are working on a bilateral investment agreement, but they've yet to agree on the number of sectors that will be off-limits to each other's investors, known as a "negatives list."
"The United States wants a negatives list as short as possible," Glaser said. "China wants a much longer negative list."
South China Sea
China has alarmed the United States and its Asian allies with an aggressive island building and fortification program in the South China Sea. The United States says the islands and the military infrastructure China puts on them threaten navigation rights.
China says the islands are legal, no commercial traffic has been impacted and the issue concerns it and its neighbors, not the United States. The two nations' warships and aircraft have had some close encounters in the region.
The question facing Obama is how to react without risking an escalation, Pei said: "If China takes more islands (and maritime territory) what will you do?"
Human rights
Xi is coming to Washington seeking "a new type of great power relations" with the U.S. that focuses on the countries' common interests and acknowledges the need to "manage and control differences," according to the official state-run Xinhua news agency.
To China, such language means U.S. recognition of China's primacy in East Asia, its approach to human rights and one-party rule in China, Pei said.
The White House is unlikely to sign on to such language. 




Leaders in accord on climate change; Pope endorses Obama's plans to cut pollution, and president hails Francis for shaking world out of apathy



Amid the pageantry of Pope Francis' visit to the White House,  President Obama received a rare papal endorsement Wednesday of his action to stem climate change and tackle other global challenges.
"Your Holiness, in your words and deeds, you set a profound moral example," Obama said during a welcome ceremony that drew thousands of people to the South Lawn. "And in these gentle but firm reminders of our obligations to God and to one another, you are shaking us out of complacency."
In thanking the president, Francis offered a forceful endorsement of his host's proposals "for reducing air pollution" and described climate change as "a problem which can no longer be left to our future generation."
Referring to the planet Earth, Francis said that "when it comes to the care of our 'common home,' we are living at a critical moment of history."
The pope, who has criticized aspects of capitalism, urged a serious examination "not only of the kind of world we may be leaving to our children but also to the millions of people living under a system which has overlooked them."
Citing civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr., Francis claimed, "We can say that we have defaulted on a promissory note, and now is the time to honor it." Making his first extended speech in English, the pontiff said American Catholics "are committed to building a society which is truly tolerant and inclusive, to safeguarding the rights of individuals and communities and to rejecting every form of unjust discrimination."
As he prepared to address a joint session of Congress on Thursday, Francis said he will speak to lawmakers "as a brother of this country, to offer words of encouragement to those called to guide the nation's political future in fidelity to its founding principles."
After the 40-minute ceremony, the president and the pope walked into the White House, then along the Rose Garden colonnade to the Oval Office, where they held a private meeting.
Afterward, the White House issued a list of "shared values and commitments" discussed by Obama and Francis. It included calls to help refugees from war-torn Syria, protect religious minorities in the Middle East, improve U.S-Cuban relations, provide opportunities for at-risk youth, promote sustainable development, and end poverty.
Obama gave the pontiff a pair of gifts: a metal sculpture of an ascending dove, the international symbol of peace, and a key from the Maryland home of Elizabeth Ann Seton, the first native-born American to be declared a saint. This year marks the 40th anniversary of Mother Seton's canonization. The key dates from 1809. 



On climate, U.S., China share 'common vision'; Presidents could get pricklier on issues of cyber theft, military



President Obama hosted Chinese counterpart Xi Jinping for a private dinner Thursday as they and their aides prepared for meetings designed to deal with cyber security and a new agreement to cooperate on combating climate change.
Though Obama aides trumpeted a climate change deal to be announced Friday, Obama and Xi are likely to have tense talks over allegations of cyber theft and a Chinese military buildup in the South Chinese Sea.
The low-key dinner at Blair House, across the street from the White House, preceded Xi's official state visit Friday. The presidents broke bread in the shadow of rising tensions between the United States and China.
The Obama administration has accused China of cyber espionage against the U.S. government and on private American companies. The United States has also protested the Chinese military buildup in the South China Sea, calling it a provocation toward U.S. allies such as Japan and South Korea.
In the agreement to be announced Friday, the United States and China will outline a "common vision" for a global climate change agreement to be negotiated at a conference in December in Paris.
The United States and China will pledge to expand domestic programs to reduce heat-trapping carbon emissions, develop new and cleaner sources of energy and find ways to finance these kinds of projects. China agreed to institute a system that would essentially put specific costs on greenhouse gas emissions.
The deal builds on an agreement Obama and Xi reached the last time the American president visited China, in late 2014.
The parties would like to reach an agreement on cyber security, but prospects are uncertain.
"We have made clear to the Chinese both publicly and private that issues related to cyber security -- and our concerns with China's conduct in cyberspace -- will feature prominently on the agenda," White House spokesman Josh Earnest said.
U.S. officials have pointed at China in the theft of millions of personal records -- from fingerprints to medical records -- that were hacked from the Office of Personnel Management.
China has accused the United States of spying on it and interfering in internal manners.
During a stop in Seattle this week, Xi said, "The Chinese government will not, in whatever form, engage in commercial theft, hacking against government networks, crimes that must be punished in accordance with the law and relevant international treaties."
Earnest said, "We put more stock in their actions than their words."
The United States and its allies have protested the construction of islands in the South China Sea that have been stocked with military bases. U.S. surveillance of these sites has led to near-confrontations between American and Chinese aircraft.
Obama and Xi are likely to discuss follow-ups to the Iran nuclear agreement, as well as ways to confront North Korea's nuclear weapons program.
The dinner at Blair House was designed to provide a low-key opening for Xi's visit, which followed Obama's high-profile meeting with Pope Francis.
In addition to bilateral meetings, Obama and Xi will conduct a brief news conference. Xi will be guest of honor at a formal state dinner in the White House on Friday.
The Chinese president will receive a White House welcome ceremony, though it will probably draw a smaller crowd than the 11,000-plus who watched Francis roll up to the presidential residence.
Unlike the event for the pope, who controls no armed forces, Obama and Xi will conduct a military review during the welcome ceremony, including a 21-gun salute.
"So there you go," Earnest said. "Pop your popcorn." 




In speech to Congress, the pope hits the right notes


To those uncomfortable with Pope Francis' forays into such worldly matters as climate change and immigration, the common criticism is that he is too secular, even political.
That assessment is unfair. As his eloquent speech to Congress on Thursday demonstrated, the pope can make a strong moral case for everything he is advocating. A moral society, he argued, opens its arms to refugees because it believes in the Golden Rule, the biblical principle that people should treat others as they would like to be treated. Similarly, a moral society acts to combat human-caused climate change to protect what he called humanity's "common home."
Francis does not bring these things up because he likes to meddle in secular affairs or because he has political ambitions. In fact, in his soft-spoken style and broken English, he might well have been the most humble speaker ever to address a joint session of Congress. He brings these issues up because he feels he has to.
His speech hit the right notes. Neither partisan nor castigating, it left members of Congress with much to think about.
Francis carefully tiptoed around some controversies while being more forceful on others.
His only apparent reference to the  Iran nuclear deal and the rapprochement with Cuba, both of which he supports, was a line praising "efforts made in recent months to overcome historic differences linked to painful episodes of the past."
His only reference to the church's longstanding opposition to abortion was a call to "protect and defend human life at every stage of its development."
Of course, there is a political dimension to much of what he says and does. Popes, and the churches they represent, are not mere abstractions concerned solely about transubstantiation or the events of two millennia ago. Nor, as Francis has emphasized more than other recent popes, are they merely in the business of enforcing church doctrine.
Popes are deeply involved in issues of war and peace, poverty and justice. They always have been, and always will be.
Particularly during times such as these, with growing strife throughout much of the globe, it's impossible not to wage moral campaigns that intersect with the secular world.
Francis is certainly no more political or secular than Urban II, who initiated the Crusades to thwart the advance of Muslims in the Byzantine Empire and to retake the holy city of Jerusalem.
And he is no more political or secular than John Paul II, who formed an alliance with President Reagan to undermine Soviet ambitions in Eastern Europe.
Whether you agree or disagree with him on specific issues, Pope Francis is an enormously powerful force for good. Many of the things he champions are of common interest to people of all faiths.
His speech was a welcome call to Congress, a body too often consumed by endless partisan infighting, to listen to the better angels of its nature. 




Obama to address U.N., meet with Putin; President takes wide-ranging agenda before world powers



President Obama addresses the world Monday on an agenda that ranges from poverty to climate change, Iran to the Islamic State and Ukraine to Cuba.
Obama plans to promote the Iran nuclear agreement, the battle against the Islamic State and other violent extremists, and the idea of a global climate change agreement by the end of the year in a morning address to the United Nations General Assembly.
"He will be making the case about the type of leadership that is needed to build on the progress that's been made but also to confront the very real challenges we face," said Ben Rhodes, the president's deputy national security adviser for strategic communication.
His remarks come the week after the president hosted Pope Francis and Chinese President Xi Jinping at the White House.
Obama plans to discuss many of the same issues he'll raise in his U.N. address in a series of meetings over the next two days, including what figures to be a tense session Monday with Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Topics for the Obama-Putin meeting include U.S. objections to what it calls Russian aggression in Ukraine and concern about a Russian military buildup in Syria.
"Our support for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine will be front and center throughout our discussions," Rhodes said.
U.S. officials have criticized Russian support for embattled Syrian leader Bashar Assad.
Putin, who authorized a Russian annexation of Ukrainian territory, says he will protect the interests of ethnic Russians in eastern Ukraine, and he objects to what he called a "coup" of a pro-Russian leader of the country in 2014.
As for Syria, Putin says he wants to help fight the Islamic State, and he criticized the United States for backing Syrian rebels seeking to topple Assad.
The American "provision of military support to illegal structures runs counter to the principles of modern international law and the United Nations charter," Putin said during an interview broadcast Sunday on CBS' 60 Minutes.
Obama opened a three-day series of U.N. activity Sunday by calling on all countries to "step up" efforts to eradicate poverty.
Addressing a U.N. meeting on sustainable development, Obama said the world has made progress on reducing hunger, improving the treatment of disease and lifting people out of poverty, but challenges remain.
"We can take pride in what we've accomplished, but we cannot be complacent," Obama told delegates.
Development programs are working, Obama said, but results can improve if the United States and other countries can address such issues as bad governance; gender, racial and income inequality; fulfilling the economic potential of Africa; and the ravages of wars.
Illustrating some of these challenges, Obama said it is "a moral outrage" that "many children are just one mosquito bite away from death." He said, "Today, some 60 million men, women and children have been forced from their homes, many by conflicts in the Middle East and in Africa."
Obama cited the global challenge he plans to emphasize throughout his U.N. meetings: climate change. "All of our countries will be affected by a changing climate," Obama said, but "the world's poorest people will bear the heaviest burden."
Officials from across the world plan to gather in Paris this December to discuss a global climate change agreement, a project Obama plans to endorse during his U.N. appearances.
As Obama flew to New York City aboard Air Force One early Sunday, the White House announced an addition to his U.N. schedule: a meeting Tuesday with Cuban President Ral Castro, Obama's second face-to-face with the communist leader since the United States and Cuba restored diplomatic relations in late 2014. 




Some doubt China will deliver on promises


FACEBOOK
President Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping agreed Friday not to engage in economic cyber espionage and cooperate on climate change.
Don't trust China's leaders. If they can, they will eat your lunch and dinner.
James John
Do you think China will stop anything it is doing while we have a weak president? Chinese leaders, just like Russian President Vladimir Putin,  know President Obama is a paper tiger. He doesn't scare Putin or the Chinese.
What should be made clear is simple. Tell the Chinese that if they hack us again, we will bring them to their knees. This message they would understand. However, only a strong leader could say this with conviction, and we don't have one.
Ron Williams
Now, China is on board to fight global warming, but the Republicans are not! They still believe climate change is natural.
Robert Rodriguez
The Chinese didn't steal our jobs; corporations with their greed for money shipped them overseas.
Barry Ross
The communist Chinese government is dedicated to bringing the United States to its knees. Beijing can do it, too, because we have so much hate for each other.
We don't know who our true enemies are.
John Monteiro 




Obama to address U.N., meet with Putin; President takes wide-ranging agenda before world powers



President Obama addresses the world Monday on an agenda that ranges from poverty to climate change, Iran to the Islamic State and Ukraine to Cuba.
Obama plans to promote the Iran nuclear agreement, the battle against the Islamic State and other violent extremists, and the idea of a global climate change agreement by the end of the year in a morning address to the United Nations General Assembly.
"He will be making the case about the type of leadership that is needed to build on the progress that's been made but also to confront the very real challenges we face," said Ben Rhodes, the president's deputy national security adviser for strategic communication.
His remarks come the week after the president hosted Pope Francis and Chinese President Xi Jinping at the White House.
Obama plans to discuss many of the same issues he'll raise in his U.N. address in a series of meetings over the next two days, including what figures to be a tense session Monday with Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Topics for the Obama-Putin meeting include U.S. objections to what it calls Russian aggression in Ukraine and concern about a Russian military buildup in Syria.
"Our support for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine will be front and center throughout our discussions," Rhodes said.
U.S. officials have criticized Russian support for embattled Syrian leader Bashar Assad.
Putin, who authorized a Russian annexation of Ukrainian territory, says he will protect the interests of ethnic Russians in eastern Ukraine, and he objects to what he called a "coup" of a pro-Russian leader of the country in 2014.
As for Syria, Putin says he wants to help fight the Islamic State, and he criticized the United States for backing Syrian rebels seeking to topple Assad.
The American "provision of military support to illegal structures runs counter to the principles of modern international law and the United Nations charter," Putin said during an interview broadcast Sunday on CBS' 60 Minutes.
Obama opened a three-day series of U.N. activity Sunday by calling on all countries to "step up" efforts to eradicate poverty.
Addressing a U.N. meeting on sustainable development, Obama said the world has made progress on reducing hunger, improving the treatment of disease and lifting people out of poverty, but challenges remain.
"We can take pride in what we've accomplished, but we cannot be complacent," Obama told delegates.
Development programs are working, Obama said, but results can improve if the United States and other countries can address such issues as bad governance; gender, racial and income inequality; fulfilling the economic potential of Africa; and the ravages of wars.
Illustrating some of these challenges, Obama said it is "a moral outrage" that "many children are just one mosquito bite away from death." He said, "Today, some 60 million men, women and children have been forced from their homes, many by conflicts in the Middle East and in Africa."
Obama cited the global challenge he plans to emphasize throughout his U.N. meetings: climate change. "All of our countries will be affected by a changing climate," Obama said, but "the world's poorest people will bear the heaviest burden."
Officials from across the world plan to gather in Paris this December to discuss a global climate change agreement, a project Obama plans to endorse during his U.N. appearances.
As Obama flew to New York City aboard Air Force One early Sunday, the White House announced an addition to his U.N. schedule: a meeting Tuesday with Cuban President Ral Castro, Obama's second face-to-face with the communist leader since the United States and Cuba restored diplomatic relations in late 2014. 



Biblical flooding becoming more common; South Carolina's 1-in-1,000-year rain is 6th in U.S. since 2010



The biblical flooding in South Carolina is at least the sixth so-called 1-in-1,000-year rain event in the U.S. since 2010, a trend that may be linked to factors ranging from the natural, such as a strong El Nio, to the man-made, namely climate change.
So many 1-in-1,000-year rainfalls is unprecedented, said meteorologist Steve Bowen of Aon Benfield, a global reinsurance firm. "We have certainly had our fair share in the United States in recent years," Bowen said.
A "1-in-1,000-year event" means that there's a 1 in 1,000 (or 0.1%) chance of it happening in any given year in a given location, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) said.
In addition to the  floods in South Carolina, the other 1-in-1,000-year rain events include the Tennessee floods in May 2010, the Mid-Atlantic, Northeast and New England drenching during Hurricane Irene in 2011, the Colorado Springs floods in 2013, the deluge in Baltimore in August 2014, and the flooding earlier this year in Nebraska, according to Bowen.
Scientists say there could be a connection between these floods and man-made climate change.
Research has confirmed that our warming climate is making intense short-term rains even heavier in many parts of the U.S. and the world, as warmer temperatures allow more moisture to evaporate from oceans and flow into rain-making storm systems, Weather Underground meteorologist Bob Henson said.
However, when speaking about this specific event, "I am very lukewarm on a climate change linkage," said University of Georgia meteorologist Marshall Shepherd in an email. He said there is scientific evidence that the worst heavy rain events are increasing, "but I am not sure you can conclusively link this event."
Bowen added that huge floods occurred long before man-made climate change was an issue. "Atmospheric river events in particular have led to unbelievable rains throughout our recorded history, most notably the 1861-62 floods in California that flooded the Central Valley," he said.
Given the vast size of the USA, it shouldn't be that surprising for extreme flooding to occur somewhere, Weather Underground meteorologist Bob Henson said. "Even very rare events do happen on a very limited basis when you're looking at a large area such as the United States," he said. 




Excuses for inaction on climate change melt away


With every passing month, the arguments for inaction on climate change are melting away faster than glaciers in Alaska. Let's take them one at a time.
Argument No. 1: The science is uncertain. Actually, it's not. An overwhelming majority of climate scientists agree that human activity is warming the planet. In fact, 2015 is on track to eclipse 2014 as the warmest year on record. This past summer was the hottest in recorded history, topping 2014 and even 1998, which featured an El Nino-driven spike that has allowed skeptics to claim, misleadingly, that temperatures haven't increased much since then.
Now, the previous peaks are being surpassed, mountain snows are disappearing, ice sheets are crumbling and sea levels are rising. Studies conclude that the increased heat is exacerbating extreme weather events, such as the severe drought in California and flooding in the eastern USA.
Argument No. 2: Other countries aren't doing anything about their greenhouse gas emissions, so the U.S. shouldn't bother.  This assertion once held a kernel of truth, but it doesn't any more. Ahead of international climate talks in Paris at the end of next month, China, the European Union, Brazil and India have made new pledges to address global warming.
Of these, China, the world's biggest carbon emitter, is the most important. Driven as much by short-term concerns about choking urban pollution as by long-term concerns about the planet, the Chinese have pledged to implement a carbon-trading plan in 2017 and have their emissions peak by about 2030.
This creates the ironic situation in which the communist Chinese are adopting a market-based approach to curb carbon emissions, while the Obama administration -- faced with an intransigent Republican-controlled Congress -- has to pursue top-down strategies that rely on government mandates.
Argument No. 3: Efforts to control emissions will tank the economy. The "do nothing" crowd focuses on how efforts to limit carbon emissions will raise electric rates. In areas that rely primarily on coal-burning power plants, that could well happen. But coal is already being displaced by cheaper, cleaner natural gas. And the critics ignore the costs, such as higher charges for air conditioning and storm damage, of inaction.
Annual insurance losses from extreme weather events, adjusted for inflation, have increased from about $10 billion in the 1980s to about $50 billion in the past decade. Lloyd's of London estimates that rising sea levels increased losses from Superstorm Sandy by 30% in New York alone. No wonder  so many businesses, outside the fossil fuel industry, are taking climate change seriously.
To the extent  there's good news, it's that the world is starting to respond with the sort of urgency the threat requires. Pope Francis has added an important moral dimension to the climate debate. Renewable energy sources, particularly solar, are becoming more competitive.
Whether all this will be enough to prevent catastrophic warming and disruption remains uncertain. What is certain, however, is that the case for denial and delay is growing weaker all the time. 




Unrealistic limits wound workers



For years, Americans have heard that the "time is now" to act on "climate change," and in recent months -- as President Obama pursues dramatic new carbon dioxide restrictions by fiat, and without the support of Congress -- those warnings have become even louder.
But a sober examination of facts suggests otherwise. Although the president has repeatedly claimed that global temperatures are increasing "faster than anybody anticipated," this assertion is contradicted by plain fact. Climate models have predicted rapid temperature increases, but actual temperatures have been essentially flat for 18 years. We are approaching the 10th anniversary of the last major hurricane to reach landfall in the U.S., yet the Environmental Protection Agency  continues to assert that climate change causes more storms.
EPA  Administrator Gina McCarthy is fond of saying that climate change "leads to more extreme heat, cold, storms, fires and floods," as she did in August upon announcing job-destroying restrictions for American power plants. But, when asked to substantiate their claims, Ms. McCarthy and the EPA gave vague and non-responsive answers.
Energy production and advances in the 20th century helped provide Americans with unprecedented improvements in the health, length and quality of life. These same energy resources will now help developing countries lift millions out of poverty. Technological advancement -- not painful government restrictions --  will keep energy costs low, increase the standard of living for all and improve global health.
Our trade deficit is surging, and our ability to influence the world's climate is limited. New emissions are coming from the developing world, which relies on traditional energy to pull its people out of poverty and despair.
Placing unrealistic restrictions on domestic energy production will wound our workers and make our businesses less competitive worldwide, while leaving our competitors unaffected.
Let's continue our progress in conservation, efficiency and innovation while maintaining a strong, job-creating economy.
Sen. Jeff Sessions, R-Ala., is a member of the Environment and Public Works Committee. 



Climate debate shifts to how to cut carbon


Thank you for supporting increased action to address the  dangers of climate change. Sen. Jeff Sessions' response underscored why the United States continues to be a barrier to effective action ("Excuses for inaction on climate change melt away," Our view, "Unrealistic limits wound workers," Opposing view, Wednesday).
By claiming that reducing fossil fuel emissions will hurt the economy, Sessions -- and his fellow climate change doubters, who are overwhelmingly Republican -- perpetuate the stalling that ensures climate change consequences worsen and makes the unavoidable structural and economic changes more painful to achieve. A rational solution  of implementing a national carbon tax would stimulate the economy through efficiency of demand and alternative energy innovation. A carbon tax provides common ground for Republicans and Democrats to address climate change and strengthen our economy.
Alan Wright
Roslindale, Mass.
Carbon emissions from U.S. power plants reached a 27-year low in April,  driven largely by the switch to cleaner-burning natural gas. It wasn't government mandates that inspired the change but the abundance of affordable natural gas made possible by the U.S. energy resurgence.
Your editorial laments that America's alleged lack of market-based action forces the Obama administration "to pursue top-down strategies that rely on government mandates." This is exactly backward. Market-driven progress in reducing carbon emissions was well underway by the time the Obama administration chimed in with its costly Clean Power Plan.
Perhaps the Obama administration believes it won't get credit for emissions reductions unless it imposes regulations after the fact. The problem is, the recent regulatory onslaught threatens major harm to the economy.
The USA leads the world in both emissions reductions and oil and natural gas production. There's no need to damage our economy to prove to the Paris climate conference how serious we are about reducing emissions. We're already leading by example.
Jack Gerard, president and CEO
American Petroleum Institute
Washington, D.C.
Twitter
We asked our followers what the USA should do to address climate change.
The USA needs to educate people and give them photos of what will happen if they don't start to change.
@99Series2Oprah
Go nuclear in a big way, but don't crush the economy with job-stifling legislation designed to kill fossil fuels.
@yoktomsqueegee
I think the U.S. is doing enough. The other countries, well, that's a different story.
@AjayCnyc
Divest from fossil fuels and finance clean energy projects.
@kaylaaa28
We need to prevent climate change skeptics from getting elected to higher office.
@ShazadHamid
Follow @USATOpinion or #tellusatoday for more. 



Oil, gas companies have the capability to be climate leaders; Energy firms are used to thinking big -- and can put those ideas into action



On Friday,  CEOs of 10 leading oil companies came together to commit to tackle climate change, ahead of the Paris COP21 summit later this year. But can big oil really become a part of the climate solution?
Some skepticism is understandable. Of the three pillars of a successful energy system -- security, affordability and sustainability -- the industry has been more adept at responding to consumer demands for security and affordability than addressing concerns over sustainability. Some may wonder if big oil is trying to secure a seat merely to slow the process down.
I believe we should listen and examine how these CEOs plan to address the issue. As a former employee, I know that oil companies are used to thinking big and acting big -- bigger than most companies in most sectors, and often bigger than many states. Energy companies have top-class engineers and scientists; they have innovated for decades to find oil and gas in the most difficult conditions; and if they fully commit their ingenuity and drive the search for technological solutions to climate change, transformational changes are possible.
Oil- and gas-related products are at the heart of many of our individual and industrial activities. For decades, oil companies and their millions of workers across the value chain have done what we, as society, have demanded of them: deliver products to improve the ways we feed, clothe and move ourselves around. In the process, these companies have contributed to improving standards of living, furthering global economic development and generating resources for states to sustain the social contract.
As has become clear, these activities involve externalities that are not adequately embedded in the cost of products. Some oil companies have resisted this realization for longer than others. Some have perceived a competitive advantage in talking up their environmental concerns, others in playing them down.
The significance of this week's announcement is that such climate positioning is no longer seen as a way of differentiating company strategy. Rather, it has become part of pre-competitive conversations and actions. It shows that companies in the industry from most parts of the world now realize the importance of limiting global temperature increases to 2 degrees. Companies in very different stages of their approach to climate are joining forces, in some cases turning the page from denial to collaboration, on a matter of vital importance to humanity's future.
The areas in which we can hope to see progress include increasing the efficiency of operations, solutions to gas flaring, and carbon capture and storage. This week's announcement sets out an agreed common path and commitments to share knowledge and learn from one another to upscale best practices and develop "next" practices to improve the industry's performance as a whole.
We may not be totally clear yet on how it will work, but the commitment itself is a genuinely new development in the oil and gas industry. These CEOs are not only putting their signatures to an agreement but also their faces, publicly committing themselves as much as their companies, employees and value chains. With the commitment of these CEOs comes the motivation and inspiration for hundreds of thousands of employees to be part of the solution.
While advocating against cynicism, I believe we need to hold these CEOs accountable to their promise and encourage them to deliver on the hopes they have raised. The same mechanisms that created the pressure to make this commitment -- from consumers, investors and governments -- will need to be deployed to monitor follow-through.
The world is changing quickly. Oil companies that started in a world of abundant resources now find themselves operating in a world driven by the abundance of data. All industries have to adapt to digitalization, the global spread of communications technology, the ability to leverage information and demands for transparency. These trends create scope for the oil industry to make rapid progress and to communicate their progress to all stakeholders.
Most projections indicate that oil -- and even more certainly, gas -- will be around for the next few decades. As we build up to the COP21 climate summit, we know that states can't fix the problems of climate on their own. We need, and expect, the public sector and private sector to take responsibility, to define their roles and be proactive. The clock is ticking.
Roberto Bocca is Head of Energy Industries and a member of the executive committee of the World Economic Forum. 




Oil, gas companies have the capability to be climate leaders; Energy firms are used to thinking big -- and can put those ideas into action



On Friday,  CEOs of 10 leading oil companies came together to commit to tackle climate change, ahead of the Paris COP21 summit later this year. But can big oil really become a part of the climate solution?
Some skepticism is understandable. Of the three pillars of a successful energy system -- security, affordability and sustainability -- the industry has been more adept at responding to consumer demands for security and affordability than addressing concerns over sustainability. Some may wonder if big oil is trying to secure a seat merely to slow the process down.
I believe we should listen and examine how these CEOs plan to address the issue. As a former employee, I know that oil companies are used to thinking big and acting big -- bigger than most companies in most sectors, and often bigger than many states. Energy companies have top-class engineers and scientists; they have innovated for decades to find oil and gas in the most difficult conditions; and if they fully commit their ingenuity and drive the search for technological solutions to climate change, transformational changes are possible.
Oil- and gas-related products are at the heart of many of our individual and industrial activities. For decades, oil companies and their millions of workers across the value chain have done what we, as society, have demanded of them: deliver products to improve the ways we feed, clothe and move ourselves around. In the process, these companies have contributed to improving standards of living, furthering global economic development and generating resources for states to sustain the social contract.
As has become clear, these activities involve externalities that are not adequately embedded in the cost of products. Some oil companies have resisted this realization for longer than others. Some have perceived a competitive advantage in talking up their environmental concerns, others in playing them down.
The significance of this week's announcement is that such climate positioning is no longer seen as a way of differentiating company strategy. Rather, it has become part of pre-competitive conversations and actions. It shows that companies in the industry from most parts of the world now realize the importance of limiting global temperature increases to 2 degrees. Companies in very different stages of their approach to climate are joining forces, in some cases turning the page from denial to collaboration, on a matter of vital importance to humanity's future.
The areas in which we can hope to see progress include increasing the efficiency of operations, solutions to gas flaring, and carbon capture and storage. This week's announcement sets out an agreed common path and commitments to share knowledge and learn from one another to upscale best practices and develop "next" practices to improve the industry's performance as a whole.
We may not be totally clear yet on how it will work, but the commitment itself is a genuinely new development in the oil and gas industry. These CEOs are not only putting their signatures to an agreement but also their faces, publicly committing themselves as much as their companies, employees and value chains. With the commitment of these CEOs comes the motivation and inspiration for hundreds of thousands of employees to be part of the solution.
While advocating against cynicism, I believe we need to hold these CEOs accountable to their promise and encourage them to deliver on the hopes they have raised. The same mechanisms that created the pressure to make this commitment -- from consumers, investors and governments -- will need to be deployed to monitor follow-through.
The world is changing quickly. Oil companies that started in a world of abundant resources now find themselves operating in a world driven by the abundance of data. All industries have to adapt to digitalization, the global spread of communications technology, the ability to leverage information and demands for transparency. These trends create scope for the oil industry to make rapid progress and to communicate their progress to all stakeholders.
Most projections indicate that oil -- and even more certainly, gas -- will be around for the next few decades. As we build up to the COP21 climate summit, we know that states can't fix the problems of climate on their own. We need, and expect, the public sector and private sector to take responsibility, to define their roles and be proactive. The clock is ticking.
Roberto Bocca is Head of Energy Industries and a member of the executive committee of the World Economic Forum. 



If sea levels are bound to rise, tax flood-risk zones; But it's doubtful Congress will pass it



It's already too late to stop global warming, say scientists. No matter what we do, sea levels will rise. Some climate activists have even released an interactive map that will let you see how much of, say Washington, D.C., will be under water in the next century, with the flooded zones depicted in blue.
If it's too late to stop global warming, I have a modest proposal instead: Tax the blue zones. That is, minimize the damage that will occur from flooding many decades in the future by reducing development now.
If we're seriously worried about flooding from higher sea levels, then we want to make sure the areas that will be flooded in the future won't be developed now. We want to limit the investment in buildings that will be swamped, and we want to limit the number of people who'll have to move. And we want to encourage people who live in those areas to move before they're flooded.
How? Well, we could limit construction in lower-lying coastal areas, ban rebuilding after hurricane damage, etc. But probably the favorite tool of politicians out to regulate behavior is to tax people. So that's my proposal: Tax the blue zones. That is, put a large and steeply increasing tax on property located in areas scientists say are likely to be flooded because of global warming.
Such a tax might seem burdensome up front, but if flooding is as big a problem as climate activists claim, today's burdens are likely to be minor compared with the problems prevented by limiting development in the blue zones.  Like the high fuel taxes designed to keep SUV-driving flyover types from burning too much gas, my proposed "blue zone tax" will affect behavior now in ways that will reduce costs in the future.
Climate activists say 20 million to 31 million Americans live in places that will be at risk of flooding from global warming by the end of the century. Just to be safe, we should aim to reduce the number of people living in these areas by 25% within 25 years, 50% in 50 years and 100% by the end of the century.
I'm not sure how big a tax that will require, but if there's anything our elected representatives are good at, it's making sure that taxes are high enough.
Whether they'll be able to pass this is another question. Though I used the term "blue zone" to refer to  the climate change map, it hasn't escaped my notice that most of those areas are blue in another sense: Urban coastal cities that are heavily Democratic. Urban Democrats are among the biggest believers in climate change. But even they are more interested in talking about global warming than in sacrificing to fix it. Still, if global warming really is a challenge that deserves the equivalent of war mobilization in response, as some activists claim, then it's hard to call my proposal too drastic. What do you say, Congress? Is there a "flood risk tax" in our future?
Glenn Harlan Reynolds, a University of Tennessee law professor, is a member of USA TODAY's Board of Contributors. 



Obama enlists corporate America to sell clean energy



The White House is enlisting Fortune 500 CEOs in its attempts to reach a breakthrough agreement on climate change, announcing agreements with 68 more companies committed to reducing their greenhouse gases before international talks in Paris.
The CEOs are among 81 major companies that made specific commitments on climate. Just as important for President Obama, they put a business-friendly face on his clean-energy initiatives.
"Historically, when you start talking about an issue like climate change, the perception is that this is an environmental issue -- it's for tree huggers -- and that hard-headed businesspeople either don't care about it or see it as a conflict with their bottom lines," Obama said. "But for these companies, they're discovering that they can enhance their bottom lines."
Obama met Monday with the CEOs of Johnson & Johnson, Intel, Berkshire Hathaway Energy, Hershey's and Pacific Gas & Electric -- and of some of the smaller companies that supply them. The White House expects the commitments made by the 81 big companies will trickle down through their supply chains, encouraging energy-efficient practices throughout the economy.
"This effort to push companies through their supply chains is significant," said Brian Deese, the White House point man on climate change. "When a large company sets certain goals, it can spur action across the supply chain though the adoption of clean energy and emissions reductions."
The "Act on Climate" pledge is part of a White House effort to bring a strong negotiating hand to the international climate talks in Paris next month. The companies promise to support the Paris talks -- and the countries involved in them -- and to take specific steps to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions.
Nike pledged to use 100% renewable energy in all its facilities by 2025. Levi Strauss said it will reduce greenhouse gas emissions 25% and purchase 20% of its energy from renewable sources by 2020. Consumer products maker Procter & Gamble plans to produce all of its fabric care products in North America with 100% wind power. 



ExxonMobil investigated for climate change statements; Subpoena questions whether energy giant deceived public, investors



ExxonMobil is under investigation by New York's top law enforcement officer about whether it lied to investors and the public about the risks and financial impact of climate change.
New York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman subpoenaed the firm Wednesday, seeking financial records, statements and other climate-change-related material dating to 1977, according to a government official with direct knowledge of the matter. The official discussed the issue on condition of anonymity because the subpoena and other details of the investigation remain secret.
"Exxon Mobil has included information about the business risk of climate change for many years in our 10-K, Corporate Citizenship Report and in other reports to shareholders," ExxonMobil said  in response to questions about the subpoena, which was first reported by The New York Times.
The company's 10-K annual report for the 2014 fiscal year stated many countries are considering regulations to reduce greenhouse gas emissions "due to concern over the risk of climate change."
"These requirements could make our products more expensive, lengthen project implementation times and reduce demand for hydrocarbons, as well as shift hydrocarbon demand toward relatively lower-carbon sources such as natural gas" it warned, adding that new rules "may also increase our compliance costs."
The broad investigation by Schneiderman's office focuses on whether ExxonMobil made timely and accurate disclosures about how its climate-change research, the impact of long-term environmental shifts and any movement away from usage of fossil fuels could have on the company's financial fortunes.
New York's Martin Act gives the state's attorney general broad authority to investigate suspected financial wrongdoing and how it could affect investors.
Material sought by the  subpoena includes research reports showing potential causes of climate change and documents detailing how the company made business decisions and financial projections based on environmental projections, according to the official. Additionally, the subpoena seeks information about ExxonMobil's funding of organizations involved in climate-change research, including those that challenged climate science findings. Schneiderman's office also sought promotional materials, advertisements and flyers, as well as the firm's disclosures in Securities and Exchange Commission filings and other statements to investors.
Investigators plan to examine whether ExxonMobil's internal research and findings square with what the company told investors and the public.
The energy giant is the second major company under investigation by Schneiderman over climate-change statements. Peabody Energy  the world's largest private-sector coal producer, turned over documents in response to a 2013 request, and disclosed the issue the following year, the official  said.
"Peabody continues to work with the New York Attorney General's office regarding our disclosures, which have evolved over the years," spokesman Vic Svecsaid in a statement the firm issued Thursday. 




Peabody reaches climate-change deal; Coal giant agrees to disclose financial risks to investors



The world's largest publicly-traded coal company has agreed to make fuller public disclosures about the risks climate change poses to its business in a settlement of charges that it misled investors and the public.
Peabody Energy reached the settlement after a two-year investigation found the St. Louis-based company's public statements about the potential economic impact of climate change didn't always square with the firm's internal financial projections, New York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman said Monday.
Peabody shares closed up 3.43% at $15.09. The coal giant's stock has lost more than 87% of its value since a Feb. 25 high of $118.95-a-share amid a global plunge in energy prices. The agreement comes four days after Schneiderman opened a similar investigation of Exxon Mobil.
Peabody has agreed to file revised Securities and Exchange Commission disclosures affirming that "concerns about the environmental impacts of coal combustion ... could significantly affect demand for our products or our securities," said Schneiderman, who characterized the agreement as the first of its kind.
"As a publicly traded company whose core business generates massive amounts of carbon emissions, Peabody Energy has a responsibility to be honest with its investors and the public about the risks posed by climate change, now and in the future," Schneiderman said in a statement announcing the agreement. "I believe that full and fair disclosures by Peabody and other fossil fuel companies will lead investors to think long and hard about the damage these companies are doing to our planet."
The coal giant in a statement stressed that "there is no other action associated with this settlement, no admission or denial of wrongdoing and no financial penalty." Peabody also said "the company has always sought to make appropriate disclosures."
However, Peabody's past SEC filings regularly denied the company had the ability to predict the impact that potential regulation of climate change pollution would have on the firm's operations. The investigation found that Peabody and its consultants in fact "made projections that such regulation would have severe impacts on the company," Schneiderman's office said.
Additionally, Peabody's SEC filings and other public communications "provided incomplete and one-sided discussions" of the International Energy Agency's projections related to future world coal demand, the investigation showed. 




Halting Keystone pipeline won't curb climate change


LETTERS
President Obama last week rejected the Keystone pipeline extension. He justifies his action by saying that it has become too political and that he is trying to mitigate climate change ("Obama administration rejects Keystone pipeline," USATODAY.com, Friday).
However, there is nothing particularly political about the Keystone decision except  Obama's desire to cater to environmentalists. And transportation of oil by an extension of the Keystone pipeline is more environmentally friendly than transportation of the same oil by rail or by tanker trucks. One other shortcoming of this decision is Obama's consistent failure to describe how this decision will in fact  limit or slow down climate change.
The American people deserve more facts and less presidential fantasy.
James F. Blackstock
Brentwood, Tenn.
The long battle over the Keystone XL tar sands pipeline came down to a central question: Is it in our national interest? It never was, and President Obama was right to reject it.
The pipeline project would have piped some of the dirtiest oil on the planet through the breadbasket of America to be refined on the Gulf Coast, mostly into fuels then shipped overseas. It always was a plan about big profits for big oil, not about helping our country. The State Department's own analysis determined that -- from wellhead to wheels -- tar sands fuel generates 17% more carbon pollution than conventional oil. That's 17% more -- gallon per gallon -- of the dangerous carbon pollution that's driving climate change.
Anchoring us to fossil fuels of the past for another 50 years is not where our country needs to go. We're already finding cleaner, safer and more efficient ways to power our economy. We're building more fuel-efficient cars, all-electric and hybrid vehicles, powering them more and more with electricity from the wind and sun.  Obama stood up to protect us from climate change and accelerate the transition to clean energy. That's the kind of leadership we expect of our presidents.
Rhea Suh, president
Natural Resources Defense Council
New York
TWITTER
We asked what our followers thought about the Obama administration rejecting the Keystone pipeline.
This decision makes no sense at all. The oil is just going to be shipped by other, more dangerous, means.
@msmith586777
Thank you, President Obama, for saving the planet from greedy, selfish oil companies that only care about money.
@HenrettaIndia
More oil shipped by rail will mean higher prices for consumers and no change in the flow of oil.
@tomtabsand
Just because oil prices appear lower during his presidency doesn't mean we shouldn't be proactive!
@CDun2
Follow @USATOpinion or #tellusatoday for more. 



ExxonMobil probe raises 1st Amendment concerns


To environmentalists, ExxonMobil is Public Enemy No. 1. The company has long fought efforts to address climate change, raising doubts long past the time when such concerns were reasonable.
But even its detractors would admit that it has a right to its opinions. Most of them, that is. New York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman has, at the urging of environmentalists, launched an investigation into whether Exxon's climate change statements were  fraudulent.
What irks environmentalists is that even as the company funded research that supported mainstream views on climate change, Exxon funded think tanks and other scientists in a broad effort to derail agreement. Over the years, Exxon made investment decisions based on the assumption that climate change was real while its executives publicly argued it  was bunk. After journalists with Inside Climate News and the Los Angeles Times exposed internal communications documenting the two-track approach, many saw parallels to the tobacco industry, which covered up the health effects of smoking.
While Schneiderman has not brought a case yet, the outlines of this investigation raise serious First Amendment concerns. This month, he subpoenaed the oil giant, demanding emails, financial records and other documents. Schneiderman's office says the case revolves around the sole question of whether ExxonMobil understated its financial risks stemming from climate change in securities filings.
Based on the facts uncovered so far, there is a key difference between tobacco firms and Exxon: The energy giant didn't hide research it funded, nor did it interfere with scientists' conclusions.
But the attorney general's inquiry won't hinge on whether Exxon hid science or even whether the company lied. Schneiderman's push is based on a powerful New York law known as the Martin Act. It just requires prosecutors to prove factual error -- not fraudulent intent. This type of law should only be used cautiously and for critical public purposes.
Therein lies the problem. The investigation won't push Exxon to reevaluate its public stance on climate change. The company already did. And the likely effect of a legal tangle is a lower stock price, hurting current investors.
It won't even get the company to make more climate-friendly investments. Long before Exxon publicly admitted climate reality, the company began transforming its focus from oil, which stands to lose market share,  toward making significant revenue from natural gas, a fuel that will become more competitive.
The notion that there are fraudulent securities filings is far-fetched. Could Exxon have understated the chances it could suffer if and when nations begin to act on climate? Perhaps. But that assumes the company knows what is going to happen. That's politics, not science.
ExxonMobil's history of climate denial is not a reason for prosecution. It is a lesson that the political views of big corporations are shaped by their own financial concerns. The fact that self-interested statements from megacorporations are not a great source for unbiased information on widely disputed public policy issues is not news to any investor. 




What if Exxon broke the law?



It's amazing what gets some people upset.
USA TODAY has barely written about the undisputed facts of what could be the biggest corporate scandal of all time: ExxonMobil, largest fossil fuel company on earth, knew all that there was to know about climate change 25 years ago.
Its scientists sampled CO2 in the atmosphere, calculated how much the earth's temperature would rise, and even provided the data that helped the company bid on leases in the fast-melting Arctic. Meanwhile, the company helped found and fund the front groups that worked to impede action that would have let the planet react in time to this growing crisis.
This information -- uncovered by award-winning journalists at Inside Climate News and at the Los Angeles Times -- has inspired revulsion on every front. Even Exxon's hometown paper, The Dallas Morning News, has editorialized that the saga "reminds us of the days when Big Tobacco adamantly insisted that science was inconclusive about the cancer-causing effects of cigarettes."
The only question is whether Exxon's reprehensible action also broke the law. Which is what environmental, human rights, indigenous and faith groups have asked the Justice Department to investigate.
Telling shareholders one thing when you know another to be true is illegal. So is failing to disclose information on official reports to the government. What about actually looking at the evidence, most of which still sits in Exxon's filing cabinets? That's the aim of New York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman, who has recently conducted a successful, though much smaller, investigation of another energy behemoth, Peabody Energy.
Of course, even if the probes find Exxon at fault and require it to pay some penalty, that won't, as the saying goes, "clear the air." At any moment in the past quarter-century, Exxon could have ended the  phony debate over climate change  by admitting that its scientists agreed with the rest of the research community. Instead, it perpetuated its  charade.
The result has been a crime against the future, but also perhaps just a crime period. Let's find out.
Bill McKibben is an environmental activist and author. New York Attorney General Eric  Schneiderman declined to provide an opposing view. 



The time for a climate deal may be now; 'Divisions ... have gone away' in latest global talks



After years of conflict and inaction, 196 nations hope to finally reach agreement on a plan to combat global warming when they convene outside Paris on Monday for 12 days of negotiations.
The United Nations-sponsored meeting will bring together 50,000 people and many world leaders -- including President Obama -- business chiefs, scientists and representatives from environmental groups, many expressing optimism that a consensus is close at hand.
"The divisions that existed in previous talks have gone away," said Jeff Nesbit, executive director of Climate Nexus, an environmental group. The difference this time is that 177 of the participating nations are coming with national commitments for reducing emissions blamed for causing the planet to warm.
On Thursday, Pope Francis, speaking in Africa, warned that it would be "catastrophic" if world leaders let special interest groups get in the way of a global agreement to curb fossil fuel emissions. Francis spoke to the U.N.'s regional office in Kenya after celebrating his first public Mass on the continent.
"It would be sad, and dare I say even catastrophic, were special interests to prevail over the common good and lead to manipulating information in order to protect their own plans and interests," Francis said, according to a transcript from the Vatican.
The pope said he hoped the Paris talks would approve a "transformational" agreement to fight poverty and protect the environment by developing a new energy system that depends on minimal fossil fuel use.
Six years ago, climate talks in Copenhagen stumbled over disagreements between developed countries responsible for the most past emissions and developing nations whose expanding economies rely heavily on fossil fuels. The main argument: which countries should be required to take the boldest steps to reduce greenhouse gas. That conference ended with a weak agreement that "recognized" the need to contain temperature rises but no legally binding treaty.
Despite the new optimism this time, success is far from guaranteed. Unanimous agreement is required for an accord, which aims to prevent greenhouse gases from warming Earth above 2 degrees Celsius, or 3.6 Fahrenheit, from pre-industrial levels by 2020. That is the minimum level climate scientists say is needed to prevent cataclysmic consequences to life on the planet.
Among the issues to be thrashed out are whether the plans by high-polluting countries go far enough to meet the 2-degree target, and whether the U.N. deal should be binding on nations or merely serve as a guideline.
Left unchecked, computer simulations predict global warming will cripple the planet, leading to extreme weather, rising sea levels, worse air quality, threats to many plant and animal species and more human conflicts over scarcer resources.
"The impacts of climate change are happening faster and more intensively than scientists had expected," said Jennifer Morgan of the World Resources Institute, a research organization focused on the environment."
Jake Thompson, of the National Resources Defense Council (NRDC), an environmental protection and action group, said that "14 of the 15 hottest years on record have occurred in this century."
Global warming is caused by the burning of fossil fuels such as coal, oil and gas that power the world. The burning emits greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane that have warmed Earth's atmosphere over the past 150 years to temperatures that cannot be explained by natural variability, according to numerous scientific studies. 




Website puts target on climate change in Arctic; Time seems right to tackle this topic in an immersive style



I guess Lara Setrakian was serious.
Setrakian is the poet laureate of the deeply immersive, single-topic website perhaps best illustrated by her acclaimed Syria Deeply, which she launched three years ago. In March 2014, she told me that her second site would be Arctic Deeply, focusing on the melting polar ice caps and set to debut that summer.
Then the Ebola crisis erupted, followed by the California drought, and they became the topics for Deeplies No.2 and No.3.
Now, at last, Arctic Deeply  will debut Dec. 8, and Setrakian says she is "extremely excited."
The venture is a partnership with the Centre for International Governance Innovation, a Canadian think-tank.
"The Arctic has been a huge priority for us for quite a while," says Setrakian, a former correspondent for ABC News and Bloomberg TV.
The timing seems right: The United States chairs the Arctic Council, and the temperature in the Arctic is rising at twice the rate as in the rest of the world.
The Deeplies are designed to address an all-too-familiar phenomenon in the news business.
When a story explodes, there is saturation coverage. Then something else explodes, and the parade moves on, and the aftermath of Explosion No. 1 is too often ignored. That's what inspired Setrakian, a former Middle East correspondent, to create Syria Deeply, which was widely applauded from the start.
On its first day, Fast Company proclaimed, "SYRIA DEEPLY OUTSMARTS THE NEWS, REDEFINES CONFLICT COVERAGE."
Setrakian says there are many other subjects that have a "Syria problem."
Setrakian looks for topics that are "generally underreported and extremely consequential for our time."
Setrakian says the episodic approach "is how our industry is built. You can't cover everything at the same time." That said, "there are people who want to know what happens on Day Four. We're here to fill in the gaps."
Arctic Deeply will follow the model of its three predecessors.
It will offer a mix of original content, links to top-flight coverage from other news outlets, news summaries, maps, op-eds, backgrounders, timelines, data visualization, you name it. All on the Arctic.
Providing that original content will be Managing Editor Hannah Hoag, who has written about climate change for a variety of publications for more than a decade. Setrakian describes Hoag's role as "hyperactive beat reporter."
For Hoag, the mission is personal.
She has visited the Arctic, and she has witnessed the impact of climate change on the population, the rising sea levels and "villages falling into the ocean."
"I've seen the changes firsthand," Hoag says.
Though  she will be based in Toronto, Hoag plans to make frequent trips to the Arctic.
Hoag says she was attracted to Arctic Deeply because "it checked a lot of boxes for me."
She says that she sees the new gig as an opportunity to take her climate change reporting to a, yes, deeper level.
"I want to talk to the people affected by climate change," Hoag says. "It's a chance to focus on a niche issue that's really important now and in the future."
Setrakian says that, three years in, she's more convinced than ever that her approach works.
"We have fantastic engagement metrics," she says. "There has been a lot of validation of the single-topic model."
Though News Deeply has gotten some grants, it supports itself in part by building platforms for other companies.
It has eight full-time employees devoted to all of the sites, including copy editors and digital staffers, and eight employees for specific projects.
Though traffic spikes at times of crisis, Setrakian says, the sites maintain a devoted cadre of regular visitors.
"For the diehards, there is a home," she says.
Should we look for more Deeplies in the future?
Setrakian says, "Refugees Deeply is definitely on the agenda." 




Protests, high alert Before Paris climate conference



France implemented exceptional security measures Sunday as nearly 150 world leaders gather here for a climate change summit barely two weeks after the multiple terrorist attacks that struck the French capital.
About 2,800 French police are guarding the Le Bourget conference center 7 miles north of central Paris, where President Obama will attend Monday's opening of the 12-day summit, along with Russian President Vladimir Putin and Chinese President Xi Jinping.
The conference will be one of the largest international gatherings ever held in France and may set a record for the number of presidents and prime ministers under one roof outside of the United Nations General Assembly in New York.
It comes as France's security forces are on full alert for additional terror plots and with some suspects still at large.
Early Monday, Obama made an unannounced stop at the Bataclan concert hall, site of the worst of the Paris attacks, according to pool reports. He was met there by French President Franois Hollande. Obama stood for a minute of silence before laying down a single white rose at the memorial without saying a word.
On Sunday, dozens of police vans circled the vicinity of the conference and spotters were placed on overpasses and other structures. Some sections of major highways and roads that link Le Bourget to central Paris were closed. Heightened security was also apparent along Le Bourget's main street, where many shops and restaurants were shuttered.
In Paris and throughout France, thousands more police tightened border checks and enforced emergency security legislation that allows Hollande to ban public demonstrations and place many people, including climate activists, under house arrest.
That did not stop a group of demonstrators Sunday from forming a human chain along the previously planned route of a climate protest that was called off by the government after the  attacks.
A separate event saw hundreds of pairs of shoes, including pairs from  Pope Francis and U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki Moon, left on Place de la Republique to invoke the canceled marches.
Those demonstrations were marred by violence Sunday when several hundred protesters, some in masks, clashed with police.
Interior Minister Bernard Cazeneuve said 174 people were jailed for possible charges.
On Monday, billionaire philanthropist and Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates is to kick off the summit  by unveiling a multibillion-dollar clean energy research and development initiative in partnership with several governments, the French government said Sunday. 



Protests, high alert Before Paris climate conference



France implemented exceptional security measures Sunday as nearly 150 world leaders gather here for a climate change summit barely two weeks after the multiple terrorist attacks that struck the French capital.
About 2,800 French police are guarding the Le Bourget conference center 7 miles north of central Paris, where President Obama will attend Monday's opening of the 12-day summit, along with Russian President Vladimir Putin and Chinese President Xi Jinping.
The conference will be one of the largest international gatherings ever held in France and may set a record for the number of presidents and prime ministers under one roof outside of the United Nations General Assembly in New York.
It comes as France's security forces are on full alert for additional terror plots and with some suspects still at large.
Early Monday, Obama made an unannounced stop at the Bataclan concert hall, site of the worst of the Paris attacks, according to pool reports. He was met there by French President Franois Hollande. Obama stood for a minute of silence before laying down a single white rose at the memorial without saying a word.
On Sunday, dozens of police vans circled the vicinity of the conference and spotters were placed on overpasses and other structures. Some sections of major highways and roads that link Le Bourget to central Paris were closed. Heightened security was also apparent along Le Bourget's main street, where many shops and restaurants were shuttered.
In Paris and throughout France, thousands more police tightened border checks and enforced emergency security legislation that allows Hollande to ban public demonstrations and place many people, including climate activists, under house arrest.
That did not stop a group of demonstrators Sunday from forming a human chain along the previously planned route of a climate protest that was called off by the government after the  attacks.
A separate event saw hundreds of pairs of shoes, including pairs from  Pope Francis and U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki Moon, left on Place de la Republique to invoke the canceled marches.
Those demonstrations were marred by violence Sunday when several hundred protesters, some in masks, clashed with police.
Interior Minister Bernard Cazeneuve said 174 people were jailed for possible charges.
On Monday, billionaire philanthropist and Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates is to kick off the summit  by unveiling a multibillion-dollar clean energy research and development initiative in partnership with several governments, the French government said Sunday. 




Defeat climate cynicism, Obama urges summit; President refuses to accept old arguments that there is nothing that can be done



President Obama urged his fellow world leaders Monday to reach a landmark deal to curb global warming before it dooms the planet.
"I come here personally as the leader of the world's biggest economy and second-biggest emitter to say that America not only acknowledges its role in climate change but embraces doing something about it," Obama said.
Speaking at the opening session of a United Nations conference attended by 196 nations, he said the old arguments for inaction on climate change had been broken.
"One of the enemies we will be fighting at this conference is cynicism. The notion we can't do anything about climate change," Obama said.
He said the next few weeks could mark a turning point in efforts to limit global temperature rises, and "climate change could define the contours of this century more than any other (problem)."
The conference, which is scheduled to conclude Dec. 11, aims to reach an accord for reducing man-made greenhouse gases that cause global warming.
Amid extraordinarily tight security, 151 world leaders converged on the exhibition halls at Le Bourget Airport just outside the French capital.
Paris remains on edge in the wake of the coordinated terrorist attacks by Islamic State militants Nov. 13 that killed 130 people.
Opening the event Monday, French Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius said negotiators had only days to finalize an agreement.
He said that when the conference ends, he wants to be able to say "our mission is accomplished." 




World can fight warming, terrorism at the same time


Opponents of meaningful action to combat man-made climate change have been shifting their arguments like a weather vane on a windy rooftop.
First, the foot-draggers fought the science. But that became harder and harder to sustain amid the mounting scientific consensus that greenhouse gas emissions from human activity are warming the globe -- and the mounting evidence of melting glaciers, rising sea levels, and more extreme floods and droughts. This year is on track to be the warmest since modern record-keeping began.
With the science becoming more conclusive, the opponents turned to the argument that U.S. action on emissions was pointless in the absence of similar commitments by other nations. But on Monday, more than 100 world leaders began to arrive in Paris for talks aimed at staving off the most destructive effects of global warming. Notably, the leaders of the two largest carbon polluters, smog-choked China and the United States, sat side by side and pledged cooperation in dealing with climate change.
Now, deprived of the "U.S. can't act alone" argument, the opponents have taken a new tack: It's crazy to focus on the long-term threat from climate change when we should be concentrating on the more immediate threat from radical Islamic terrorism. After President Obama said the Paris summit would be a rebuke to terrorists, former New York mayor Rudy Giuliani said he had never "heard anything more absurd from a president." Republican presidential front-runner Donald Trump, speaking Monday on MSNBC, called Obama's remarks about the threat posed by global warming "one of the dumbest things I've ever seen."
Actually, what's dumb is the which-threat-is-greater debate. Radical jihad and global warming are different threats requiring different responses over different time periods. One is a battle against a warped ideology, the other an enormous economic and scientific problem. The world  is capable of dealing with more than one challenge at a time.
To have postponed or canceled the climate talks in the wake of the Nov. 13 attacks that left 130 people dead in Paris would have been a huge victory for the terrorists. Indeed, the convergence of world leaders in France is a powerful statement that the world will not be cowed by acts of barbarism. As Obama put it Monday, "What greater rejection of those who would tear down our world than marshaling our best efforts to save it."
No one, of course, is expecting the Paris talks alone to save the planet, or even to hold warming below the target of 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit) above pre-industrial levels. At best, the pledges to reduce emissions will bend the temperature curve in ways that  take some worst-case scenarios off the table.
Regardless of the specific agreements that emerge during the next two weeks, the Paris talks represent an example of the civilized world pulling together to fight a common threat to humanity. That's a valuable exercise in its own right, one that's applicable to more than a single problem and one that will be important to generations long after the Islamic State terrorist group is crushed. 




How Obama can follow Paris deal; Use executive authority to double down on reductions of carbon emissions in the U.S.



President Obama's crackdown on greenhouse gas emissions from cars and power plants made the U.S. a leader at the United Nations climate summit.
Now, with the whole world watching and 2015 smashing high temperature records, he can give real meaning to the promise Paris offers without bumping into an intractable Congress.
The president can accelerate and expand efforts to slash emissions of global warming pollutants by the natural gas and oil industries.  He can improve refinery efficiency. He can issue tougher efficiency standards for energy-wasting home furnaces. And the government must begin to tackle industries such as cement manufacturing, which gets little public attention but spews vast amounts of carbon dioxide, the gas primarily responsible for climate change.
Methane leaks
Methane is the most plentiful greenhouse gas in the atmosphere, after carbon dioxide. It is emitted in far smaller amounts and disappears sooner, but molecule for molecule it traps more than 25 times as much heat as CO2 over 100 years.
The Environmental Protection Agency estimates that nearly 30% of U.S. methane emissions come from oil production and the production, transmission and distribution of natural gas. The agency is preparing standards that would limit methane leaks from new drilling sites and pipelines.
But what about currently operating sites? They are likely responsible for roughly 90% of the oil and gas industries' methane emissions. The administration must set standards that would require industry to plug these leaks.
The president used authority granted by Congress in the Clean Air Act to tackle pollution from cars and power plants. Using that same authority, the administration can crack down on oil refinery emissions -- one of the largestindustrial sources of greenhouse gases after power plants.
Much electricity is wasted on inefficient appliances. Some consumers know to shop for those with an "energy star" efficiency rating. The government sets standards to prod manufacturers into making improvements -- for those shopping for homes they own and for renters whose appliances are supplied by landlords.
Efficiency standards for dozens of appliances have been the subject of negotiations with foot-dragging industry. For example, according to Marianne DiMascio of the Appliance Standards Awareness Project, litigation and other resistance have stalled the adoption of meaningful new energy-saving rules for gas-fired home furnaces since 1987.
This year, the Energy Department proposed requiring new units to convert 92% of their fuel's energy into heat, a significant improvement from the current 80% rate.
Stuck in cement
Manufacturing cement involves burning fossil fuels to heat raw materials to up to 2,700 degrees Fahrenheit, giving off roughly a ton of carbon dioxide for every ton of cement emerging from the kiln.
We must work to cut these emissions and those from other energy-intensive industries such as metals production.
To be sure, these measures lack the poetic appeal of solar panels and wind turbines that cleanly yield electricity from endlessly renewable resources -- themselves growing elements in the fight against global warming. Even so, using energy more efficiently is the key workhorse as we wring greenhouse gases from the economy.
After 2016, the next president will need to defend, and follow through on, the two major steps Obama has set in motion: the tough fuel efficiency standard that will cut automotive carbon pollution 40% while delivering a new car fleet that averages 54.5 miles per gallon in 2025, and a 32% cut in power plant emissions. Automakers are already trying to weaken the new-car standards, and coal and utility forces have threatened to drown the Clean Power Plan in a flood of litigation.
The refusal of so many Republican presidential candidates and members of Congress to even recognize the problems posed by global warming only underscores the need for Obama to do as much as possible in 2016.
To turn the tide against the changing climate, he must act boldly and leverage our leadership as though the world depends on it. Because it does.
Dan Becker directs the Safe Climate Campaign. James Gerstenzang, who formerly covered the environment and the White House for the Los Angeles Times, is the campaign's editorial director. 




White House launches water initiative; Center to coordinate conservation effort; summit announced



The White House launched an ambitious effort to enlist the private sector in its efforts to reclaim and conserve water Tuesday, saying it's critical for the country to better manage water supplies that are under increasing pressures from climate change.
"Water is a huge challenge in this country, and I think we all know that," Interior Secretary Sally Jewell said at  the White House. "It's important we have all hands on deck."
The strategy, known  as a "moonshot for water," focuses on encouraging technological advances and private-sector investment to rebuild water projects such as  reservoirs, boost data collection, support water-sharing agreements and find  technologies to recycle and conserve water.
Jewell announced the creation of a Natural Resource Investment Center to help coordinate research and investment on water conservation and water rights management. She also announced a Water Summit to be held at the White House on March 22,  World Water Day.
In an analysis of U.S. Geological Survey data published this month, USA TODAY and The Desert Sun found that water levels have declined in 64% of the wells in the government database during the past two decades.
In a report laying out strategy, the White House noted that some of the largest increases in water demand because of climate change are projected to occur in U.S. regions that rely on groundwater, such as the Great Plains and the Southwest. It said global warming "will challenge the sustainability of the aquifers in these regions."
The Obama administration would like to see better materials for water pipes, where leaks rob 16% of the nation's water supply, and better sensors to detect those leaks;  water-efficient household appliances; and more cost-effective desalination technologies.
James reported from Palm Springs, Calif. 




Paris climate deal: Hard work comes next; At least 55 countries must ratify pact so that it can enter into force by 2020



First there were tears, hugs and a standing ovation that greeted approval of a historic international climate deal. Now the world's nations must focus on the nitty-gritty details to implement a complex, 31-page plan to limit the rise of global warming this century.
"This agreement was part of a road through Paris, not ending in Paris," said Rodne Galicha of the Philippine environmental coalition Aksyon Klima. "The world's efforts cannot end here with this deal."
The Paris agreement, the culmination of four grueling years of talks, commits the 195 nations that approved it to limit global warming to "well below" 2 degrees Celsius, or 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit, through 2100 compared to pre-industrial levels. It also promises to help put poor countries on a pathway to develop their economies in an environmentally friendly way.
In the next few weeks, the agreement will be "deposited" at United Nations headquarters in New York, where ambassadors will be asked to sign on behalf of their countries starting in April. After that, at least 55 countries representing at least 55% of the world's greenhouse gas emissions blamed for global warming must ratify the deal so it can enter into force by Jan. 1, 2020.
U.S. ratification would require only President Obama's signature, not Senate approval, because the agreement was crafted in a way so it would not be a treaty requiring ratification from a Republican-controlled Senate that might be hostile to the accord. The pact requires specific climate action in each country. The U.S., for example, has promised to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in 2025 by 26%-28%, compared with 2005 levels.
When Obama addressed the opening of the climate summit, he said meeting those goals required immediate action, including incentives for renewable energy, increased energy efficiency and less use of high-emission fossil fuels.
In all, 187 countries have made similar pledges of their own in the lead-up to the talks.
Next year, when the climate summit reconvenes in Morocco, negotiators will begin to focus on a "ratcheting mechanism" that aims to force countries to reduce their emissions and strengthen other climate initiatives as technology improves and circumstances change.
"In Paris, the human race joined together in a common cause, but what is really important is what countries do after this," said Kumi Naidoo, executive director of Greenpeace International. "All eyes will be watching because this deal on its own won't dig us out of the hole we're in. But it makes the sides of the hole less steep."
For Paris, the next step is recovering from a  summit hangover. Many  commentators said the summit helped distract the city's attention from the deadly Nov. 13 terror attacks. 




Kerry says climate deal will transform economies



Secretary of State John Kerry said Sunday the historic Paris accord aimed at reducing greenhouse gases to slow global warming will transform world economies by encouraging corporations to invest trillions of dollars on clean energy over the next three to four decades.
It "sends a very powerful message to the global marketplace," Kerry said on NBC's Meet the Press. "There are jobs to be created, money to be made."
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., said it would have the opposite effect: killing jobs and raising energy costs. He said the deal reached Saturday could be spurned if a Republican wins the presidency. President Obama "is making promises he can't keep," McConnell said in a statement Sunday.
Kerry, who led U.S. negotiations to reach the Paris agreement, appeared on several talk shows Sunday highlighting elements of the accord, including mandatory requirements for nations to report their progress in meeting carbon-reducing goals.
The deal by 195 nations seeks to limit rising temperatures to less than 2 degrees Celsius -- 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit -- compared with preindustrial levels through the year 2100. Industrialized nations pledged $100 billion a year through 2020 to help poor countries impacted by climate change. 



Landmark climate accord doesn't end in Paris


In today's fractious world, getting 195 nations to agree on anything, even whether the sun rises in the east, isn't easy. So, in many ways, the climate change deal that emerged from Paris over the weekend, a month after terrorist attacks traumatized the city, represents a remarkable achievement on behalf of humanity.
But the things that made the Paris agreement so broadly acceptable to so many countries -- its voluntary nature, its lack of enforcement tools, and the many "requests" and "urges" throughout the 31-page text -- are the same things that threaten its effectiveness.
Previous U.N.-sponsored efforts to create legally binding cuts in greenhouse gas emissions ended in failure. So the Paris accord takes a pledge-drive approach: Each nation decides for itself how it plans to curb emissions, and by how much. Every five years, countries will be expected to submit stronger pledges.
The pledges made so far aren't nearly enough to meet the Paris target of keeping the planet "well below" 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit of warming. So the agreement is less a solution than it is an effort to provide more structure and encouragement to the effort to control man-made climate change.
In the best case scenario, the Paris accord will evolve like the competition between countries, and increasingly across regions, to sign new free trade agreements. Successive rounds of negotiations take on their own momentum and lead to more and more progress.
In this scenario, countries will keep upping their pledges as new technologies emerge and renewable energy becomes more competitive. China,  the world's top carbon emitter, will drastically reduce its burning of coal, which is choking its cities with smog. Peer pressure will prevent countries from cheating. Working together, the worlds' nations will stave off catastrophic warming.
In the worst case scenario, countries will fail to meet their pledges, either by cheating or by recalibrating what they can afford. They will renege on financial commitments to help island countries survive rising sea levels. A glut of low-cost fossil fuel energy will stifle widespread adoption of greener technologies. Republicans in Washington will yank the U.S. out of the Paris accord, giving other nations an excuse to bail as well. Barring a technological miracle, global warming will continue unabated and wreak havoc on the planet.
Which, if either, scenario prevails is yet to be determined. But, if nothing else, the Paris agreement -- hashed out during what's shaping up as the warmest year since modern record-keeping began -- sends a strong signal that the time for debating the basic science is past, and the time for mitigation and adaptation has arrived.
As the agreement states, "Climate change represents an urgent and potentially irreversible threat to human societies and the planet and thus requires the widest possible cooperation by all countries." With so much at stake, the U.S. participation in negotiating the Paris agreement is only a first step. Selling the idea at home, and building consensus to follow through on America's commitments, will be the true test of the Obama administration's climate legacy. 




Hope springs from the U.N. climate talks


Eric Holthaus, The Slatest: "Round-the-clock negotiations are currently underway in Paris with perhaps the boldest goal of any international summit of world leaders in history: a comprehensive plan to transition the world economy away from fossil fuels and prevent catastrophic climate change. ... Despite all that's left to decide, it's an incredibly hopeful sign that every single country signed off on the latest version of the negotiating text.  ... After 21 years of international climate talks, countries are eager for an agreement that's designed to withstand decades."
Elizabeth Kolbert, The New Yorker: "Developing countries, which, so far at least, have contributed relatively little to climate change, are, in many cases, likely to suffer the worst effects of it. These countries have, collectively, been promised $100 billion a year to help deal with problems like sea-level rise, and to adopt cleaner energy systems. Only a fraction of that amount has been raised. The Obama administration has pledged $3 billion, but, in an effort to muck up the negotiations in Paris from a distance, Senate Republicans have vowed to block any U.S. contribution. ... One of the most robust predictions that can be made about climate change is that it will send millions ... of people in search of new homes. ...  By mid-century, which, in the scheme of things, is not very long from now, the Syrian refugee crisis is likely to seem routine. ...  Security-minded Republicans should be doing everything they can to insure that Paris succeeds."
BjornLomborg,TheAustralian: "A massive global survey of 8 million people (shows) that people in the world's poorest countries rank climate policy last after other policy priorities. ... Negotiators are poised to sign up to carbon cuts that will cost the global economy at least $1 trillion a year. Given the transformation that this sum could make in the lives of billions of the world's poorest, most malnourished, and worried about basic education ... this is just immoral."
John A. Mathews, The Japan Times: "In China and India ... the relatively rapid transition away from fossil fuels in both countries is driven not so much by concerns about climate change as by the economic benefits renewable energy sources are perceived as conveying. ...  It is very possible that without the (renewable energy) revolution, efforts to minimize the impact of climate change would never succeed. If we are able to avoid the worst dangers of a warming planet, we may have India and China to thank for it." 



Discovery sounds a global alarm in documentary 'Racing Extinction'



After the Academy Award-winning success of his 2009 documentary The Cove, which helped expose the hunting and slaughter of dolphins in Japan, filmmaker Louie Psihoyos wanted to paint a picture of extinction in broader strokes.
The result is Discovery's Racing Extinction, premiering Wednesday and airing in 220 countries and territories after a Sundance screening and limited theatrical run. Shot over six years and culled from more than 2,000 hours of footage, the documentary follows Psihoyos and his team as they travel to dozens of countries, charting the global effects of climate change.
"We wanted the audience to get a sense that there are several drivers of extinction; there's not just one thing causing it," Psihoyos says. As thousands of land mammals and sea creatures die out, smaller species such as plankton and bees are endangered. "Humankind is part of a web of life, not a pyramid with man on top. When you start losing the small things, breaking apart this web that took 4.6 billion years to evolve, everything else begins to fail."
Actor/producer Fisher Stevens, who teamed with Psihoyos on both projects, says: "The Cove was a microcosm. This takes it to a much bigger level in terms of how many species of animals. Then we cover something much bigger, which is ourselves. If we continue polluting, and putting as much carbon and methane in the air, we're the ones that are going to be extinct. Or certainly, we won't be able to lead these big, beautiful lives."
Cameras uncover often disturbing scenes: a Hong Kong factory where hacked-off shark fins are traded; an Indonesian village where manta rays' gills are torn out and sold; and a restaurant in Santa Monica, Calif. (since  shut down), after an undercover sting operation revealed it was illegally serving endangered whale.
But for those still reeling from Cove's haunting images of butchered dolphins and blood-filled waters, Extinction offers a less graphic look at illegal poaching.
"The Cove got the reputation of being a horror film, and a lot of people didn't end up seeing it that we thought should have," Psihoyos says. "Racing Extinction is also a thriller, but we kept a lot of the violence out of this one. We wanted to create a film that could incite change at all ages, bringing families together to watch and make an impact."
Extinction also looks at how meat consumption is a driver of climate change. "The amount of land we use to grow cow, chicken, and pig food, and the amount of carbon and methane emitted because of cows -- that scared the hell out of me," Stevens says. Such gases warm the environment and acidify the oceans, speeding up the process of global warming and leading us closer to what the film refers to as a "sixth mass extinction."
Extinction isn't all bad news. The film shows the efforts of activists to save endangered wildlife and pioneering efforts in green technology such as electric cars.
"Many more people are understanding, and it's interesting that the documentaries are really the drivers of the movement," Stevens says. "The idea behind showing this film on Discovery is that we want eyes. We want the world to see this movie, and there's no better network or audience for it. Hopefully, this movie will be seen more than any of these others." 




Dissent dwindles on climate change



President Obama, Chinese leader Xi Jinping, Russian President Vladimir Putin and Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan don't see eye to eye on a lot of things. But they don't differ on this: Humankind is warming the planet, and we need to do something about it.
As for climate scientists, it's not too much to say that virtually all of them are on board with the idea that man-made fossil fuels caused by burning coal, oil and gas are heating planet Earth.
It wasn't ever thus, this overwhelming feeling that those who would deny man's influence on rising temperatures are simply wrong and not part of the conversation, whether in the negotiating rooms at Le Bourget, where United Nations climate talks are taking place through Dec. 11, or the wider debate around the world.
In Copenhagen in 2009, the last time world leaders congregated on this scale -- 150 of them were in Le Bourget on Monday, a record outside the U.N. Assembly in New York -- to try to forge a global plan to limit greenhouse gas emissions, the "deniers" were hardly a majority. They were on the margins. But they still loomed large over the proceedings in a way that filtered down to how the event was portrayed by the international news media, myself included.
I recall making the journalistic effort to inject  "balance" into the stories I wrote by pointedly stating that there were individuals and groups that disputed the human contribution to climate change. They were vastly outnumbered and outgunned, but the dissent seemed to deserve some recognition in the interest of journalistic balance.
About a month before the summit in Copenhagen, the Climate Research Unit email controversy, or inevitably "Climategate," concentrated the minds of these dissenters.
A cadre of deniers had hacked into a database belonging to Britain's University of East Anglia and claimed to have uncovered evidence  showing that some scientists made up data to prove global warming existed. That evidence never fully materialized, but the alleged revelation cast a mini-shadow over those talks, at least in the public imagination.
It's early days for the two-week conference  in Paris, but it seems obvious that six years and a lot of hand-wringing later, climate change skepticism has been further relegated to the shadows. The evidence, scientists agree, is that clear.
Unless, of course, you are one of the leading contenders for the Republican Party's nomination to be the next president of the United States. "I consider it to be not a big problem at all," front-runner Donald Trump has said. Ben Carson, another top candidate, has said, "There is no overwhelming science that the things that are going on are man-caused and not naturally caused."
Still, this time around, I have yet to notice the balancing qualifiers so prevalent in the climate coverage of the past. Balance is not balance if it's simply wrong. It's faux balance.
The global scientific community says human-fueled climate change exists. The world's governments say it exists. The case seems clear, and decisive.
Although not to everyone. One group is showcasing its global warming doubting wares in Le Bourget's exhibition halls. The Committee for a Constructive Tomorrow, or CFACT, will debut this week in Paris a documentary called Climate Hustle, billed (by CFACT) as the most important take on climate change since Al Gore's An Inconvenient Truth in 2006. David Rothbard, the film's executive producer, also the president of the organization, says in a news release that the documentary "debunks the (global warming) scare and clears the way for a return to sound science and rational debate."
In the face of near unanimity from scientists and world leaders, his is a lonely crusade.
Hjelmgaard is a Berlin-based correspondent for USA TODAY. 




World needs climate agreement; He seeks 'legally binding' targets to aid global economy



President Obama expressed confidence Tuesday that the world's nations can soon strike a global climate change agreement, including "legally binding" targets designed to forge a "low-carbon global economy" in the century ahead.
"I'm convinced that we're going to get big things done here," Obama said during a news conference that followed two days of climate talks in Paris.
The president also said he and Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin continue to be at odds over Russian support for Syrian leader Bashar Assad, and last week's shooting at a Planned Parenthood office in Colorado shows the need for sensible gun laws.
Obama criticized some of the rhetoric surrounding Planned Parenthood and abortion. Though there is a "legitimate, honest debate" about abortion in the USA, Obama said, people should make sure "we're talking about it factually, accurately, and not demonizing organizations like Planned Parenthood."
As Obama flew back to the USA on Tuesday, diplomats from about 180 countries remained in Paris to try to hammer out a global agreement designed to address the destructive impact of warming temperatures on the Earth's environment.
The trend of global warming "affects all trends," Obama said, making it "an economic and security imperative" for every country.
Officials in large industrial countries have questioned the idea of a global climate change agreement, saying it might hurt their economies. That group includes China, India -- and the United States, where members of the Republican majority in Congress have vowed to block a variety of Obama administration climate change initiatives.
Obama said he is confident that Russia will realize that a successful campaign against the Islamic State will require Assad's removal from power, which might not happen for some time. 




Nations must work together to limit carbon emissions


FACEBOOK
More than 100 world leaders, including President Obama, gathered in Paris this week for a summit on climate change.
Either global warming is real or it is not. Let's assume that it is. It is either man-made or it is natural. If it is man-made, then the progressives of the world cannot do anything to stop it without getting China and India to agree to limit their fossil fuel use or Brazil and Indonesia to  limit the destruction of their rainforests.
Otherwise, the West will just be helping the economies of the so-called developing world at the expense of Western economies. And man-made global warming, if it is real, will keep on going.
Roberto Johnson
Climate alarmists are like crazy people holding signs that say "the end is near." They've been predicting climate apocalypses for decades, and when nothing happens, they just push the date out.
Liberals have been falling for this junk  for decades. It is just another way for the government to have more control and to reward special interests.
Robert Anderson
A carbon tax to achieve zero net emissions would go a long way toward fixing the problem and could actually be a boon to the economy. It's something we should do even if all the science ends up being wrong.
Mathew Andresen
Many skeptics cannot understand scientific fact. They would rather trust God to attend to all issues relating to the planet. They should visit cities in China where visibility is so poor because of the man-made smog.
John Thomas 



ExxonMobil deserves scrutiny


LETTERS
ExxonMobil may have "a right to its opinions," but it is not entitled to all the benefits that society extends to corporations if it has cynically breached the public trust. And absent a full investigation, it would be premature to draw any conclusions about the legality of ExxonMobil's conduct ("ExxonMobil probe raises 1st Amendment concerns," Our view, Climate Change debate, Nov. 23).
Your editorial claims that "the most likely effect of a costly legal examination of Exxon's past statements is a lower stock price, hurting current investors." However, it is ExxonMobil -- not the attorney general of New York state -- that is responsible for any losses incurred by its shareholders as a result of decisions that corporate leaders deemed to be in the company's self-interest. As with the tobacco cases two decades ago, our law enforcement officials have a duty to protect investors and the public when narrow corporate self-interest conflicts with the broader public interest.
Kathy Mulvey, campaign manager
Union of Concerned Scientists
Washington, D.C.
The editorial was well done, the opposing view not so much ("What if Exxon broke the law?"). The opposing view states that ExxonMobil's past public statements about climate change and its actions have "inspired revulsion on every front." Most of us have learned to look to the self-interest of those who try to influence us. Maybe some would like not to  buy ExxonMobil products, but criminal charges go too far in interfering with free speech.
Hassel "Bud" Hill Jr.
Aurora, Colo. 




High cost from wild weather; Man shouldn't accept economic disruptions from nature's deviations



Super hurricanes, mega droughts and 1,000-year floods have made big news in the months leading to this week's climate talks in Paris. Everyone wants to know how global warming has contributed and whether we should prepare for a future of weather on steroids. The science community races to provide clear answers.
Yet we need not wait for additional science, or resolve contentious policy debates, to recognize one simple truth. Natural climate variability itself -- even absent human influence -- disrupts our lives and businesses to a far greater extent than we should accept. Research suggests that the U.S. economy suffers half a trillion dollars or more in lost growth annually due to unforeseen climate variations.
This column is not about human influence. Plenty has been published on that divisive topic. This is a story about nature's own climate uncertainties, and the economic consequences of not understanding them better.
We have allowed disagreement over human influence to push aside what should be a non-controversial goal: improving our understanding of nature itself.
Economic inefficiencies
A 2011 report in the Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society showed that state by state economic output due to climate-related supply and demand disruptions, such as flood-delayed deliveries, averages more than 3%. In states such as  California, Ohio and New York, it is more than 10%.
That doesn't  include the high costs of catastrophic weather events, such as the 2012 Superstorm Sandy's $65 billion tab.
Unexpectedly low or high seasonal temperatures routinely lead to higher energy prices. Drought places enormous economic pressure on farmers. Abnormal spring flooding in one place or another disrupts businesses each year. Deviations from normal climate were cited by The Wall Street Journal as a major cause for the gross domestic product drop of 2.9% in the first quarter of 2014.
We don't have to accept this.
A significant portion of this inefficiency can be recovered as economic growth through better information technology. Doing so would be a huge boost to the nation's welfare. Improving our ability to anticipate climate fluctuations provides one lever to grow the economy faster -- an elusive goal these days.
If the impact of climate variability on the U.S. economy is large, the global impact is far larger.  Anything we learn that reduces our vulnerability  can be leveraged to grow international business opportunities as well.
Businesses must anticipate climate at multiple time scales. Retailers plan inventory for weather-sensitive consumers months in advance.  Farmers decide a season or more ahead which crops to plant and how tight water resources might be. Food prices  soar when farmers are wrong. Companies  anticipate climate decades in advance when planning infrastructure.
Threat from Congress
Improving the information that helps us anticipate, adapt to and price in nature's variability would seem a wise, non-partisan goal. Much of what we need originates in basic research, funded by government agencies such as NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the U.S. Geological Survey and the National Science Foundation.
The challenges are large: understand Earth in all its complexity, including the interactions among atmosphere, ocean and lands. Succeeding requires ongoing commitment.
Yet this commitment is at risk. In the complex process of creating the 2016 budget, Congress has threatened to cut NASA Earth science funding by 18% to 32%.
Political distractions
Some say this is because these agencies research both natural and human-caused climate variability. We may choose to debate the policy response to human influence, but we should not let it hamper other business needs. Improving our ability to predict natural climate is too important to accept this sort of political fallout.
Working to understand natural climate variability is a no-brainer. This variability imposes a 3% economic tax we can help eliminate. The business community gets it.
Let's enable our businesses to outsmart climate variability, not make them collateral damage of the climate debate.
It is too important to our economic growth.
William Gail, author of Climate Conundrums: What the Climate Debate Reveals About Us, is the former president of the American Meteorological Society and co-founder of Global Weather Corporation. 




Gates touts Mission Innovation green plan



Microsoft co-founder and philanthropist Bill Gates unveiled plans Monday by an international coalition to invest billions of dollars in clean-energy projects to combat global warming.
Gates unveiled the initiative on the opening day of the  summit on climate talks alongside President Obama, French President Franois Hollande and Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi.
Among the 20 countries participating in Mission Innovation are France, the U.S., India, South Korea, Saudi Arabia, Australia, Canada and Norway. Joining them  are a group of 28 international investors, including Marc Benioff, chairman and chief executive of Salesforce.com; Virgin Group founder Richard Branson; and Prince Alwaleed bin Talal of Saudi Arabia.
The countries pledged to double investment in low or no-carbon energy research. At the same time, Gates said investors will support companies that bring innovative clean-energy ideas to the marketplace. That alliance will be called the Breakthrough Energy Coalition.
Gates said last summer he would invest about $1 billion over the next five years to clean-energy projects. 




U.N. accords can't control the climate



In the face of grave danger,  world leaders have  again decided to spin their wheels and attempt to control the Earth's climate via a  climate agreement. Instead of facing authentic threats such as  terrorism,  leaders will instead convene in Paris to try to elevate "climate change" as one of the gravest risks to humanity. This despite the fact that peer-reviewed studies have shown  there is less human conflict during warmer eras than during colder ones.
Yet another United Nations climate summit is convening with claims that the world must act or face certain calamity. But left out of this discussion are many scientists skeptical of the scientific claims and goals behind the U.N. climate agenda. A top U.N. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change official has stated  that the panel's  objective is not necessarily climate, but to  "redistribute de facto the world's wealth by climate policy." The  climate panel has proved to be nothing more than a political lobbying organization masquerading as a "science" body.
U.N. agreements will limit the economic growth of  industrialized nations while further slowing growth in the developing world, where more than a billion people lack access to running water and electricity.  So-called green energy from  wind and solar is simply not ready to take over powering the world economy, but the U.N. agenda is to require that it replace the proven success of coal, oil and gas.
The U.N. summit's goal  of limiting the Earth's temperature to a rise of  no more than  2 degrees Celsius  is also not based on science. The Climategate emails revealed that even  U.N. scientists admitted that the 2-degree  goal was "plucked out of thin air."
The notion that a U.N. agreement to limit emissions will somehow alter the Earth's temperature or storminess is bordering on belief in witchcraft.
If we faced a climate catastrophe and  had to rely on the U.N. to save us, we'd all be doomed! Nothing the U.N. is proposing to "solve" climate change would have any measurable impact on temperatures or storminess, even if you accept the scientific claims.
Marc Morano is publisher of Climate Depot, a former senior staff member of the Senate Environment & Public Works Committee and producer of the documentary Climate Hustle. 


