A presidential pitch for 'a better politics'; Last address's theme: Future of democracy


President Obama called for "a better politics" in his last State of the Union Address, saying all the other challenges the country faces can only be overcome if Americans "can have rational, constructive debates."
In a speech redolent of a valedictory farewell, Obama defended the progress made over the last seven years and set out an agenda that will likely remain unfinished long after his presidency ends: turning back the effects of climate change, launching a "moonshot" to cure cancer and sparking a grassroots movement to demand changes in the political system.
"A better politics doesn't mean we have to agree on everything," he said. "But democracy does require basic bonds of trust between its citizens."
The speech contained a not-so-veiled reference to the ideology of Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump, whose campaign to "make America great again" has tapped a vein of discontent at the Obama legacy. Obama said America has seen the likes of Trump before, as the country has gone through waves of immigration and periods of economic, social and political change.
"Each time, there have been those who told us to fear the future; who claimed we could slam the brakes on change, promising to restore past glory if we just got some group or idea that was threatening America under control," Obama said. "And each time, we overcame those fears."
Quoting President Lincoln's 1862 State of the Union (then delivered as a written report, not a speech), Obama said America should reject the "dogmas of the quiet past."
He also defended his economic record against attacks from the right: "Anyone claiming that America's economy is in decline is peddling fiction."
On foreign policy, Obama rejected the notion that "our enemies getting stronger and America (is) getting weaker." He said building up the Islamic State as an existential threat only plays into the hands of the terrorist group.
Breaking with tradition, the speech was intentionally short on specific legislative proposals or executive actions. He said he hoped to work with Congress on criminal justice changes. He renewed proposals to shut down the military prison at Guantanamo Bay, raise the minimum wage and provide free community college.
He called for a "moonshot" to cure cancer, and put Vice President Biden -- whose son died of brain cancer last year -- "in charge of Mission Control."
Obama framed his speech around what he called "four big questions" -- a faint echo of the most famous State of the Union Addresses in history, in which President Franklin Roosevelt delivered what came to be known as the "Four Freedoms" speech in 1941. Those questions:
"How do we give everyone a fair shot at opportunity and security in this new economy?" Obama acknowledged that economic changes have squeezed workers and pledged to work with House Speaker Paul Ryan on ways to alleviate poverty.
"How do we make technology work for us, and not against us -- especially when it comes to solving urgent challenges like climate change?" Obama said innovation is in the nation's DNA, and called for technological solutions to curing cancer, slowing climate change and generating clean energy.
"How do we keep America safe and lead the world without becoming its policeman?" Obama asked Congress for a resolution authorizing military force against the Islamic State but said the United States was threatened "less by evil empires, and more by failing states." He predicted that future extremist groups would emerge from those failed states around the world. "We also can't try to take over and rebuild every country that falls into crisis," he said. "That's a recipe for quagmire."
"How can we make our politics reflect what's best in us, and not what's worst?" Obama called for an end to gerrymandering of election districts, a limit to the influence of big money in politics and restrictions on voting rights.
"Changes in our political process -- in not just who gets elected but how they get elected -- that will only happen when the American people demand it," he said. 



It's a new dawn for solar industry - mostly; As more workers gravitate to sector jobs, tax incentive hurdles turn others off


While American workers flocking into the solar-energy industry help make it one of the fastest-growing sectors of our nation's economy, there are signs the "solar coaster" ride is far from over.
Nationally, solar companies are adding workers nearly 12 times faster than the overall economy, and accounted for more than 1% of all jobs created in 2015, says a new report by the Solar Foundation, a pro-solar industry group. More than 208,000 Americans now work in the solar industry, a 20% increase in a single year, and up 123% since 2010, the report said.
"The U.S. solar power industry continues to grow and create jobs, providing further evidence that promoting economic growth and fighting climate change can go hand in hand," former New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg, who is also the United Nations secretary-general's special envoy for Cities and Climate Change, said in a statement announcing the study.
More workers have produced a lot more solar energy. In 2014, the United States installed as much solar power capacity every three weeks as it did in all of 2008. Utility customers and regulators are increasingly demanding that electricity come from clean sources like solar and wind.
The industry's dependence on tax credits and incentives poses a risk, however: A decision by Nevada regulators to reduce the credits paid to homeowners who install solar panels this month prompted two major companies, SolarCity and Sunrun, to announce they're laying off about 750 workers.
Coal is still king, just not when it comes to jobs. In December, the mining industry, including coal mining, lost about 8,000 jobs, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, with about 129,000 jobs lost over 2015. The BLS doesn't track solar jobs, instead deferring to the Solar Foundation for statistics.
Coal, natural gas and nuclear remain the backbone of the nation's energy sector, providing the bulk of our "always-on" power. Solar power made with photovoltaic cells remains a small portion of the country's energy portfolio, accounting for about 1% percent of total generation.
Solar installations come in many forms, from the small panels installed above streetlights in New Jersey to the backyard panels serving homes in Vermont or the cooperative solar "farms" built in the desert canyons of Colorado. Solar advocates say tax incentives and government mandates have been highly successful in prompting solar development.
California, for instance, has set a goal of getting 33% of its electricity from renewables by 2020 and is  on track with a separate effort to install nearly 2,000 megawatts' worth of solar panels on rooftops by the end of this year. President Obama has been a major driver of solar-energy jobs and last year announced plans to train 75,000 people, many of them veterans, to work in the solar sector.
The boom-and-bust cycle of tax incentives, dating to the Carter and Reagan presidencies, has led to long-term inconsistency in the industry, said Frank Marshall, the director of policy for Asheville, N.C.-based FLS Energy, which builds large solar farms.
"We often call it the solar coaster," Marshall said.
U.S. SOLAR JOBS GROW
Survey says solar job field is growing fast as the nation transitions toward alternative
energy sources. (In thousands):
'10   '11   '12   '13   '14   '15   '16
94   100  119  143  174  209  240(1)
1-Projected
Note: numbers rounded.
Source: The Solar Foundation 





Let free market help address climate change

LETTERS
It was great to read a thoughtful conservative argument for getting on the right side of climate change politics ("Conservatives need to thaw on warming," Opinion, Friday).
Bob Inglis, a former Republican congressman, makes solid points gently but firmly, from suggesting we stop listening to "pundit-entertainers" who "tell us what we want to hear," to applying the "simple and sound principle of accountability" and finally recommending that we "attach costs to all fuels to make energy pricing transparent and inclusive."
That last part is exceedingly important. As we've seen in the living laboratory of our economy, when fossil fuels are dirt-cheap, consumers use more. Conversely, when they cost more, they use less. The best way to capitalize on this simple free-market principle is to replace our current maze of regulations and subsidies with a simple, predictable rising carbon price on fossil fuels, and then recycle all of the money right back to the taxpayers as a highly visible, equal per-capita carbon dividend.
As Inglis points out, that will encourage investors and entrepreneurs to "deliver innovation" in droves. It's high time for conservatives, liberals and everyone in between to roll up our sleeves and solve climate change together.
Rick Knight
Brookfield, Ill.
FACEBOOK
I suspect many  GOP politicians believe in global warming . It's just that  they are getting paid by powerful  donors to keep their mouths shut. Once businesses acknowledge global warming, they would have to make changes in how they operate,  which would affect their bottom lines.
Damon Walton
Changes in the climate are normal, natural and beyond our ability to control.
Felipe Gonzales
Adding costs to fuels is not going to solve the problem. That's robbing the poor to feed the rich businesses, which will just pass the cost down to customers.
Environmentalists wring their hands over the global climate, and the solution is for the Average Joe to pay more or use less? Get serious.
Andy Rus
TWITTER
We asked what our followers thought about 2015 being the hottest year since modern record-keeping began, according to government scientists.
It means that climate change is real, but what can we really do about it? Unknown.
@charlesrothroc2
It's frightening. I've lived in four different countries in as many years, and everywhere people have been seeing unusual and extreme weather.
@grantbennett_
Record-keeping began only about 1880,a blip in time.
@DelmontPaulJ
I don't trust the numbers. Proponents have too much at stake to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth.
@yoktomsqueegee
Considering green technology is finally evolving, regardless of the politics, how about we simply support less pollution?
@MrHaneyICT
Science deniers will be the death of us all.
@NothappyMatt
Follow @USATOpinion or #tellusatoday for more. 



IN BRIEF

supreme Court blocks Obama's climate plan
The Supreme Court dealt a blow to President Obama's signature climate change initiative Tuesday by halting the administration's effort to reduce power plant pollution while a legal battle rages on.
The move by the court's five conservative members was a shock to environmentalists, who had expected the justices to deny, as a federal appeals court did last month, a petition filed by mostly Republican-led states and industry leaders.
Now the Environmental Protection Agency must halt enforcement of the "Clean Power Plan" until the lower court decides on the merits of the GOP-industry lawsuit against it. Oral arguments don't begin until early June, and a decision could be another year away.
--Richard Wolf
Meteorologists: ship blew it by sailing into storm
Royal Caribbean should have known better.
That's the word Tuesday from weather experts who closely monitored the development of the storm that rocked the line's Anthem of the Seas on Sunday and Monday.
The 168,666-ton vessel should not have sailed southward from New York into the path of the growing weather system, which eventually packed winds of up to 100 mph and created waves higher than 20 to 30 feet, WeatherBell meteorologist Ryan Maue said.
Southeast Regional Climate Center climatologist Jordan McLeod, suggested that, at the very least, Royal Caribbean is guilty of poor weather analysis.
--Gene Sloan
Winter storm pelts Ohio Valley, Mid-Atlantic
A winter storm slogged through the Ohio Valley and Mid-Atlantic states Tuesday, dumping light-to-moderate snow on cities such as Louisville, Cincinnati, Washington and Philadelphia.
Snow totals of 2-6 inches will be common in most areas, with higher amounts along the Appalachians in parts of Pennsylvania, West Virginia and Virginia, according to Weather Bug meteorologist Doug Kahn.
Several school systems were closed in the Louisville and Cincinnati metro areas.
The heaviest snow from the storm so far Tuesday was in Ohio, where 4-5 inches of snow fell near Wilmington, according to the National Weather Service.
--Doyle Rice 



BILL GATES' SUPERPOWER: More (and cheaper) energy; Annual Foundation letter also tackles gender inequality


Bill Gates, the tech entrepreneur turned global philanthropist, says it's not enough to use "lots of crazy-seeming ideas" to solve climate change. The cost of such clean energy must be lower than today's options.
"If we just got energy that costs what it does today but doesn't emit greenhouse gases, that's a very good thing but it's not nearly as exciting as getting energy that's even cheaper," Gates told USA TODAY ahead of the release of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation letter Monday. "Because for poor people, things like fertilizer, lighting, materials to build their housing -- their budgets are in the physical world. So cutting the price of energy is very progressive, and increasing it is very regressive."
The Microsoft co-founder is adamant that scientific solutions to our warming planet must come from a partnership between government agencies and the private sector, a plan he feels would have bipartisan support given that in the past, such collaborations landed humans on the moon and created the Internet.
"I think government research is probably the least controversial of all government spending programs, which is saying a lot nowadays," Gates says. "If you look at the Department of Energy's research and development budget, you're asking to increase by a doubling, which would be an additional $6 billion. It's not a huge thing, and if that really is letting America have cheaper energy and be the lead in these breakthroughs, I don't think you'd be much of a partisan divide on that."
Tech companies such as Google and Facebook, with their increasingly huge valuations and extensive global reach, can't necessarily be counted on to solve issues related to climate change, Gates says.
"Through their own use of energy and materials, their data centers, their employees flying around, the physical products that they create, they can be exemplars in investing in breakthrough approaches," he says. "But whether they go beyond that in terms of their research budget and fund other things, that's really up to them, if they think it's an area of competence for them."
He notes that his company, Microsoft, recently "was talking about doing a data center under water (for heat reduction), which is being prototyped. I don't know how well that will work" but it is reflective of the kind of outside-the-box thinking that is critical to solving the world's various challenges.
Gates says that because public utility companies spend less than 3% of their budgets on R and D, it is all the more imperative that clean-tech innovations receive private funding. While he is personally investing funds in such research, the Foundation's efforts remain keenly focused on helping alleviate the suffering of poor people in Africa by curing diseases such as malaria and developing drought-resistant crops.
The Seattle-based foundation, which was founded in 2000 with funds provided by both Gates and his longtime friend, investor Warren Buffett, is the world's largest private philanthropy with $43.5billion in assets. To date, the foundation has distributed more than $34 billion, including a recent $1.5 billion grant to bolster child immunizations globally.
The latest foundation letter got its inspiration from a meeting the Gates' had last year with Kentucky students, who asked the couple what superpowers they would want. Bill said "more energy," and Melinda said "more time."
In his portion of the letter, which includes handwritten asides scrawled in the margins by each, Gates admits that to get carbon dioxide emissions to zero "we need an energy miracle," but adds, "I've seen miracles happen before. The personal computer. The Internet." Although Gates feels "time is not on our side," he notes that he's excited about outlier ideas that include using solar energy to produce fuel and "batteries the size of swimming pools."
In her part of the letter, Melinda gates tackles the unfair burden of unpaid labor on women globally. "Unless things change," she writes, "girls will spend hundreds of thousands more hours than boys doing unpaid work simply because society assumes it's their responsibility." While this is common in first world countries, it's especially egregious in regions such as the Middle East and Africa, where women spend up to five times more time on chores than men, as compared to nearly double in North America.
"It's not just about fairness," Melinda writes. "Assigning most unpaid work to women harms everyone: men, women, boys and girls."
Gates says his wife is particularly active on issues such as improving paternity leave time, which companies such as Facebook have recently improved (in light of founder Mark Zuckerberg becoming a father). The letter notes that in Canada, fathers who got and took paid leave spent 23% more time on household chores even after returning to their jobs.
After focusing nearly two decades and prodigious resources on a range of often vexing global issues, Gates says he's still optimistic about the state of the world.
"Because the news lens is more on the setbacks than the gradual improvements, I think the world at large has not seen where a combination of innovation and generosity is actually having this huge positive effect," he says. "I wouldn't enjoy the foundation work if I wasn't seeing a lot of progress on all the things that we work on." 



Acidic oceans are stunting growth of coral reefs; A new study run outside the lab shows the damage done by carbon


Ocean acidification caused by global warming is slowing growth of the world's coral reefs, a first-of-its-kind experiment found.
Scientists altered ocean water in a coral reef near Australia to a level of acidity observed two centuries ago. The researchers found coral grew about 7% more in response to the more alkaline water from the 1800s compared with the more acidic water of today, according to a study published Wednesday in the journal Nature.
"Our work provides the first strong evidence from experiments on a natural ecosystem that ocean acidification is already slowing coral reef growth," said study lead author Rebecca Albright of the Carnegie Institution for Science. Previous studies were completed in laboratories.
Coral reefs have been declining for decades. Without significant cuts to greenhouse gas emissions, the world's coral reefs may be gone by the end of the century, other studies have found.
Since the start of the industrial revolution in the 1800s, the world's oceans have grown nearly 30% more acidic, according to a 2009 Scientific Committee on Oceanic Resources report.
The process is driven by man-made climate change. Heat-trapping carbon dioxide emitted into the air by burning coal, oil and other fossil fuels ends up as excess carbonic acid that's absorbed by the ocean. The acidification affects coral, shellfish and other marine life.
"Ocean acidification is already taking its toll on coral reef communities. This is no longer a fear for the future; it is the reality of today," Albright added.
The agreement reached between world leaders in Paris last year to limit rising temperatures over the next several decades is a start toward combating ocean acidification but may not be enough, said study co-author Ken Caldeira, also of the Carnegie Institution.
"Every little bit of emissions reduction helps coral reefs a little bit, but if we really want coral reefs to persist into the future, little bits of emission reduction will not be enough," he said. "Cuts in emissions must be deeper and come more rapidly."
Richard Feely, a chemical oceanographer at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in Seattle who was not involved in the study, said it is significant the research wasn't conducted in a laboratory.
"You are actually seeing the response in the field" to the change from a more acidic to alkaline ocean water, he said. 



Come hell or high water; Climate change deniers risk both the planet and their place in history


The campaigns to remove the names of 19th century racists and colonialists from buildings and monuments raise a troubling question for today's political and business leaders: How will history judge those who would consign future generations to a world severely damaged by climate change?
When U.S. Sen. John Calhoun described slavery as a "positive good" in 1837, abolitionists had already documented the many ways in which slavery was anything but good.
When the British businessman and politician Cecil Rhodes wrote in 1877 that "it is our duty to seize every opportunity of acquiring more territory," colonialism was already under attack as immoral and counterproductive.
If any issue is as morally fraught today as slavery and colonialism were, it is climate change. Scientists have been warning for more than three decades that continued release of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere will lead to catastrophic changes in the Earth's climate and ecosystems. Yet humans are now releasing about twice as much carbon from fossil fuels as in 1980.
Laws of physics
Betting against the predictions of climate scientists essentially amounts to betting against the laws of physics. As the atmosphere becomes more opaque to the infrared radiation given off by the Earth's surface, the planet inevitably will warm. Sure, a small group of contrarian scientists thinks that some sort of countervailing mechanism will offset the warming. But they have little or no evidence to support their convictions.
As essential life support systems begin to fail, people will ask whether the crises they are confronting could have been averted. Inevitably, they will focus on the politicians and business leaders who impeded action when the warnings became clear. If those decision-makers are already dead, they will be condemned posthumously, as Calhoun, Rhodes and other past leaders are being condemned today. If they are still alive, they will be asked to account for their actions.
I recently came across a similar case of retrospective condemnation, though on a smaller scale.
When Mount St. Helens began to rumble and spout ash and steam in the late winter of 1980, the governor of Washington, the prominent scientist Dixy Lee Ray, established danger zones around the mountain to keep people away from potential eruptions. But the zones were much too close to the volcano, largely because Ray and other government officials did not want to disrupt the Weyerhaeuser Co.'s logging of the old-growth forests it owned right next to the mountain.
When Mount St. Helens erupted on May 18, 1980, only three of the 57 people who died were inside the danger zones, and two had permission to be there. Ironically, the only victim of the volcano who was breaking the law was the one person people tend to remember from the eruption: the cantankerous octogenarian Harry R. Truman, who refused to leave his lodge on the northern flank of the mountain.
Tarnished legacy
Ray's failure to establish adequate safety zones tarnished her legacy as the first woman governor of Washington. But Ray, who died in 1994, was lucky. If the volcano had erupted on a weekday rather than a Sunday morning, 10 times as many people could have died, including hundreds of Weyerhaeuser loggers in the surrounding woods.
Today's climate change deniers cannot expect to be so lucky. Exactly how climate change will play out remains to be seen.
Already, troubling signs of the traumatic and often unexpected consequences of a warming world are appearing: massive die-offs of starfish off the coast of the Pacific Northwest, a geologically sudden increase in sea level, enhanced flows of refugees from parts of the world stressed by warmer temperatures and drought.
Leading Republican presidential candidates Donald Trump and Ted Cruz have also led the field in their resistance to climate science and remedies. If one of them is elected and blocks action, the consequences -- for him and for the planet -- could be severe.
In her new book Great Tide Rising: Towards Clarity and Moral Courage in a Time of Planetary Change, Oregon State University philosopher Kathleen Dean Moore calls for the use of moral reasoning, where people "affirm what they think is true or good or right and then, the crucial step, back their claims with reasons."
Future generations will apply that standard to us. We would be wise to apply it to ourselves.
Steve Olson is a Seattle-based science writer. His latest book, Eruption: The Untold Story of Mount St. Helens, was published this month. 



Dem candidates claim ZIP code enclaves; Support clustered in communities


Before Bernie Sanders came along, Trevor Sullivan had never donated to a presidential campaign.
Sullivan, 28, the owner of the all-vegan Pingala Cafe and Eatery in Burlington, Vt., said no other candidate is more aligned with his values or more focused on the "environmental crisis" climate change poses than Sanders. Inspired by his yoga-teaching wife, he donated $888.88 to Sanders' campaign in January.
"The number eight has a lot of lineage as being a sacred number in a lot of religions," he said.
Sullivan and other Sanders supporters put places such as Sanders' home town of Burlington, San Francisco's Mission District and bike-friendly swaths of Seattle on the nation's fundraising map, according to a USA TODAY analysis of the ZIP codes funding the campaigns of Sanders and Hillary Clinton, his rival for the Democratic presidential nomination.
Sanders also counts college towns such as Cambridge, Mass., and Ithaca, N.Y., among his top ZIP codes -- a snapshot of the ways Sanders' unorthodox campaign expanded the fundraising landscape beyond the donor-rich corridors of New York, Los Angeles and Washington.
The patterns are starkly different for Clinton.
The analysis shows her biggest financial fuel coming from the nation's two centers of power. Six of the 10 ZIP codes providing the most campaign cash to Clinton sit in Manhattan -- from Chelsea's art gallery-filled streets downtown to the upscale neighborhoods uptown that abut Central Park's green expanses.
Neighborhoods in Washington and one of its wealthiest suburbs, Chevy Chase, Md., make up the four remaining ZIP codes on Clinton's top 10 list.
"It's a little microcosm of the race," said Viveca Novak of the Center for Responsive Politics, which tracks political money. "She's the Democratic establishment, and he's the renegade who's been able to successfully raise money in new ways."
Sanders, a self-described Democratic socialist, has proved adept at raising huge sums in small amounts. Fueled by online donations, Sanders raised $42.7 million in February, the largest one-month haul of any candidate in the 2016 presidential field and nearly $13 million more than Clinton collected that month for the primary battle.
The ZIP code analysis examined donations larger than $200 made through Jan. 31.
Campaigns aren't required to disclose donors' names and addresses for contributions that do meet that threshold, and candidates have not yet revealed details of their February donations to the Federal Election Commission.
The majority, 71%, of Sanders' contributions fall at or below the $200 mark. That allows him to return repeatedly to those donors for cash before they reach the $2,700 limit on what an individual can donate  for the nomination battle.
Only 17.6% of Clinton's contributions have come in amounts that small. More than half of Clinton's donations had hit the $2,700 cap as of Jan. 31, according to the non-partisan Campaign Finance Institute. Only 3% of Sanders' had.
The 05401 ZIP code, which encompasses a sizable portion of Burlington, serves as the top source of his campaign money that came in amounts larger than $200. The grand total: $89,462.81. Sanders was mayor of the city -- pop. roughly 42,400 -- from 1981 to 1989.
Sanders' No. 2 ZIP code, 94110, includes San Francisco's Mission, a rapidly gentrifying neighborhood where high-end clothing boutiques and shops selling ice cream made with organic buffalo milk have joined the discount stores and empanada shops that served the neighborhood's traditionally working-class Latino population. Software engineers, game designers, programmers and Web producers are among his donors from that neighborhood and the nearby Castro section of the city, which ranks No. 4 on his top ZIPs.
Clinton's top ZIP code, Manhattan's 10011, takes in Chelsea and portions of Greenwich Village. In all, she has raised more than $828,000 from the neighborhood. Her Chelsea-area donors include billionaire media executive Barry Diller, whose Frank Gehry-designed corporate headquarters building sits across from the Chelsea Piers and the Hudson River.
Chelsea resident Jay Pagano has donated $375 to Clinton and counts himself among her longtime supporters.
"I think she has a wealth of experience in politics, governing the country and in foreign affairs, and that makes her the most qualified person to be president," Pagano said this week during an interview from a phone-bank operation in New York organized by a pro-Clinton union. He called voters in Illinois, urging them to support Clinton in Tuesday's primary.
His Chelsea neighbors seem divided in the race. The neighborhood ranks No. 7 on Sanders' list of top 10 ZIP codes, the analysis shows.
Pagano, 70, said he recently wore a Clinton button near his building when a patron at a nearby cafe screamed at him, "Hillary sucks!"
"I was shocked," he said, "but I attribute it to the fact that it's a very divided electorate."
Pagano is president of the Fire Island Pines Property Owners Association, a gay enclave on the New York barrier island. Support for Clinton is high there, he said.
"Gays feel that she has been with us all along and deserves our support," he said, although Clinton did not announce her support for same-sex marriage until 2013, soon after she left her post as secretary of State.
"I think that a lot of the country evolved and evolved very quickly on the issue of gay marriage," Pagano said. "I don't think Hillary was a laggard."
There is considerable overlap in the sources of their contributions, the analysis shows.
Sanders counts four New York ZIP codes among his top 10, for instance. Clinton has raised large sums from San Francisco neighborhoods supporting Sanders, but they rank below New York and Washington as top sources of her campaign money. She's also collected donations from Sanders' home town of Burlington but is well behind him in financial support from Vermont's largest city. 



White House report: Heat in 2030 could kill an additional 11,000


Extreme temperatures linked to climate change could cause an additional 11,000 heat-related deaths in the U.S. in the summer of 2030, according to a report released Monday by the Obama administration.
That's just the most obvious of many health effects of climate change outlined in the report, part of a year-long effort by the White House to highlight the immediate effects of rising global temperatures.
Ragweed pollen season is now as many as 27 days longer than it was in 1995, leading to more asthma episodes in children, and wildfires and increasing ozone levels also could lead to respiratory problems. Incidents of mosquito- and tick-borne diseases such as  West Nile virus and Lyme disease are now moving north. And more violent rainfalls will lead to more flooding, more runoff and more contaminated drinking water.
"This isn't just about glaciers and polar bears, it's about the health of our families and our kids," said Gina McCarthy, administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
The report involved the work of more than 100 government scientists at eight federal agencies, and comes almost a year after President Obama convened the deans of 30 medical and public health schools in an effort to draw attention to the impacts of climate change.
Officials said the study  looked at whether some of the effects of climate change would be offset. "Because of the science we have in this report ... we can say that the increase in heat-related deaths far exceeds the decrease in cold-related deaths," said U.S. Surgeon General Vivek Murthy. 



Kids caught up in scary media climate


The other night, a friend's daughter came tearing into her parents' bedroom -- she'd had a nightmare that the Islamic State was hunting her down. Though only 10 years old, this child's reality had been shaken by headlines that have become inescapable. Images and fears that saturate today's media landscape were finding her as she slept.
Whether the story is terrorism, economic turmoil, global warming or racial tensions, children  are being raised in fear and are having an increasingly difficult time remaining, well, children. Fold in a world of bullying and the constant pin pricks of social media, and you begin to get the disturbing picture.
This alone should be enough to keep parents up at night, yet our troubles don't end there. The problem is exacerbated by a programming gap for tweens, or kids 7 to 12. At the critical age when they are forming their ideas of who they are, how the world works and how they should behave in it, tweens have no developmentally appropriate and humane content just for them. One would think that in the sea of TV, gaming and social media content, every age group would become a niche audience. But tweens have fewer tools and outlets than their younger counterparts or the  adolescents above them, experts tell us. Today's tweens are being neglected.
I wanted to find out how kids are supposed to navigate this world. So I reached out to Michael Levine, an educator who runs the Joan Ganz Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop that focuses on children's learning and all things digital. He explained that tweens today are experiencing an adult world without the life experience or cognitive abilities to process it or make sense of it. This exposure creates a "modeling crisis" in which children race toward adulthood unprepared and, in many cases, damaged. This isn't just a parenting problem, he says, but a societal one.
This all takes me back to a different time. In the 1970s, some of you may remember Free To Be ... You and Me, a project I started with a group of friends. That, too, was also a time of tumult, as American society was struggling with issues of race, gender equality, violence and sometimes-apocalyptic fears. Children, we knew, were catching whiffs of this in their daily lives. We wanted to help them grow up in a different kind of world.
So we set about to empower and inform these pillars of the next generation. A record, a book and a TV special were aimed at just that. Sexism and racism were out. Compassion and acceptance were in. Stars including Michael Jackson, Mel Brooks, Alan Alda, Carol Channing and Diana Ross sang, told stories, played in funny sketches in a bold campaign to lay the groundwork for a more accepting and loving society.
Today, the angry impulse toward division is inescapable for adults and children alike. These kids are getting it in large doses -- most dramatically in this election cycle. These "always-connected" youth, as Levine puts it, devour a swamp of low-quality, stereotypical offerings that too often glorify conflict and may compromise children's social relations and identity needs.
I took these concerns to Michael Rich, a pediatrician who founded Harvard's Center on Media and Child Health. He points out that our society really can't even comprehend how this cocktail of media immersion and programming vacuum will play out in this generation of tweens. Rich tells me that the narrowcasting websites popular among tweens are populated by snarky, values-free content.
I'm someone who believes in the power of media to change the culture. And it's hard to sit passively and watch children suffer. In my work at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, I see the indescribable and captivating kindness and empathy that children are wired to offer. I see children comforting peers who are also fighting cancer. All of them show remarkable strength, courage and otherworldly compassion. Yet life's lessons, and deep human kindness, should surround all children, and not just when tragedy is at their family's doorstep.
We as a society need to take stock of how today's messages and programming are affecting children. What kind of world will be created by a generation of Americans seared by anger and numbed to hate?
Do we really want to find out?
Thomas is an actor and national outreach director for St. Jude Children's Research Hospital. 



Puerto Rico rescue plan offers template for strapped states

The list of things that Congress hasn't done is long. It hasn't addressed the budget deficit, shored up Social Security or restrained health care costs. It hasn't come to terms with climate change or immigration. It hasn't fixed an overly burdensome tax code or a declining Postal Service.
So it comes as a pleasant surprise that lawmakers have decided to take on the issue of Puerto Rico, the U.S. territory of 3.5 million people that is drowning in debt.
House Republicans are expected to begin committee debate Wednesday on a plan that would allow Puerto Rican municipalities, utilities and state-owned companies to renegotiate their debts under favorable terms. The measure would also create a federally appointed control board to temporarily oversee the island's finances.
The measure represents what has been sorely lacking in Congress in recent years: a good-faith effort to solve a festering problem through pragmatism and cross-party consultation. Although some Democrats and Puerto Rican leaders have criticized the control board aspect of the plan, such boards are necessary and highly effective when governments get too far into debt. A board has helped Detroit address its debt problems, and a similar one got Washington, D.C., back onto its feet in the 1990s.
While Puerto Rican finances are of little concern to most Americans, it is refreshing to see Congress tackle any issue. And this one has the added benefit of being unpopular with hedge funds that have bought up a significant part of Puerto Rico's debt and have been banking on their ability to force a hard bargain.
Hedge funds and other investors have indulged -- perhaps even enabled -- Puerto Rico's profligate ways in part because federal law prohibits the island's local governments and state-owned companies from declaring bankruptcy. Without that ability, investors figured they could get very good terms in the event of widespread defaults.
But that approach was predicated on Congress not changing the law to allow bankruptcies, or doing what is proposed now, which is to allow for a bankruptcy-like restructuring process outside of bankruptcy.
What's more, the House plan could serve as a template for handling states in over their heads. No state has anywhere near the debt load of Puerto Rico. But a number -- we're looking at you, Illinois -- have made absurdly large commitments to pensions and health care for government retirees.
These excessive commitments put states' future in serious doubt. State governments, like the territorial government of Puerto Rico, are considered sovereign entities and cannot declare bankruptcy. One solution would be to allow states to renegotiate their heavily troubled pension and health plans in federal bankruptcy court.
When governments get in over their head, something has to give. It is gratifying that, for a change, Congress wants to be part of the solution instead of the problem. 



Fracking presents profound danger


A growing body of evidence tells us that fracking is a danger to our water supply -- our most precious resource. It's a danger to the air we breathe. It has resulted in more earthquakes. It's highly explosive. And it's contributing to climate change.
The toxic chemicals used in fracking are known to cause lung cancer and birth defects. Both the Environmental Protection Agency and the National Academy of Sciences have shown clear evidence that hydraulic fracturing can lead to a contaminated water supply.
We cannot allow our children to be poisoned by toxic drinking water just so a handful of fossil fuel companies can make even more in profits. There is simply no good way to contain the cocktail of toxic chemicals pumped into the ground.
Moreover, the threat of methane emissions from fracking presents a profound danger to our climate. Methane traps more than 84 times the heat of carbon dioxide. While natural gas might burn cleaner than coal, the enormous explosion of fracking and the resulting release of methane presents a significant danger to our planet.
I'm proud that my state of Vermont has joined with  New York to ban fracking. According to New York's Department of Environmental Conservation, no amount of regulation can safely guard against the dangers fracking poses to our land, water, air, natural resources and public health.
If we are serious about safe and clean drinking water and clean air, if we are serious about protecting the health of our children and families, and if we are serious about combating climate change, we need to phase out fracking nationwide.
Unfortunately, Secretary Hillary Clinton disagrees. Even worse, as secretary of State, she worked to export fracking throughout the world to reward companies such as  Chevron, Halliburton, ExxonMobil and ConocoPhillips. That, in my view, is unacceptable.
The time has come to fundamentally transform our energy system away from fossil fuel and toward clean sources of power such as  wind, solar and geothermal. And by doing this, not only will we create millions of new jobs, we also will save our planet in the process.
Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., is a candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination. 



Get politics out of climate debate


On this Earth Day 2016, there is a great deal of frenzy about how our Earth is going to become uninhabitable, as the civilized activities of man allegedly trigger unstoppable global warming and climate change.
With the Obama administration set to commit the U.S. to the Paris  climate agreement by signing our nation onto the document Friday, it is obvious that science has taken a back seat at the United Nations.
The environmentalists, bureaucrats and politicians who make up the U.N.'s climate panel recruit scientists to research the climate issue. And they place only those who will produce the desired results. Money, politics and ideology have replaced science.
U.N. climate chief Christiana Figueres has called for a "centralized transformation" that is "going to make the life of everyone on the planet very different" to combat the alleged global warming threat. How many Americans are looking forward to the U.N. transforming their lives?
Another U.N. official has admitted that the U.N. seeks to "redistribute de facto the world's wealth by climate policy." The former head of the U.N. climate panel also recently declared that global warming "is my religion."
When all the scare talk is pushed aside, it is the science that should be the basis for the debate. And the hard cold truth is that the basic theory has failed.  Many notable scientists reject man-made global warming fears. And several of them, including a Nobel Prize winner, are in the new Climate Hustle movie. The film is an informative and even humorous new feature length movie that is the ultimate answer to Al Gore's An Inconvenient Truth. It will be shown one day only in theaters nationwide on May 2.
As a skeptic of man-made global warming, I love our environment as much as anyone. I share the deepest commitment to protecting our planet for our children and grandchildren. However, I desperately want to get politics out of the climate debate. The Paris climate agreement is all about empowering the U.N. and has nothing to do with the climate.
Weather Channel founder John Coleman has spent more than 60 years as a meteorologist, including seven years as the original weathercaster on ABC's Good Morning America. 



For the planet and the politicians, the heat is on

It's Earth Day, and the planet is running a fever.
The global thermometer shows that 2016 is on track to be the world's warmest year since modern record-keeping began in 1880, topping the record set just last year. Boosted by El Nino and climate change, March was the 11th consecutive warmest month, and it deviated from normal more than any previous month.
Some of the other recent entries on Earth's medical chart:
In the past six years in the USA, states have set monthly records for warmth 132 times; there have been only four coldest months.
In the past six months, three freakishly intense tropical storms in the Pacific and Indian oceans, spawned by record warm waters, have generated peak winds of 173, 185 and 215 miles per hour.
Thanks to heat and drought, wildfire season is starting earlier and ending later in the USA and abroad.
New research suggests that the huge West Antarctic ice sheet might disintegrate within decades, raising sea levels and inundating coastal cities. The extent of Arctic sea ice, meanwhile, hit new wintertime lows.
Just this week, the temperature reached 89 in Seattle, breaking the record for hottest April day by four degrees, and Houston had record rainfall, with nary a hurricane or tropical storm in sight.
Can any single extreme weather event like these be blamed on global warming? No.
Are these the types of extreme events that become increasingly likely because the Earth is heating up, and warm air holds and releases more water? Yes.
There's no quick or easy cure for what ails the planet. The Paris climate accord, to be signed by more than 130 nations Friday at the United Nations, represents the most ambitious international effort to date to head off catastrophic warming. But even if all countries hold to their promises to curb emissions of greenhouse gases, the pledges aren't nearly enough to meet the target of keeping the planet "well below" 3.6 degrees  of warming.
Further progress will depend in large part on advances in green-energy technology -- and on U.S. leadership, which in turn will depend in large part on the results of November's presidential election.
So far, the top two candidates for the Republican nomination have shown frighteningly little awareness of the threat posed by climate disruption. Donald Trump has said that he's "not a big believer" in human-caused climate change. Ted Cruz has called climate change a liberal plot to control the economy and "every aspect of our lives."
While there's plenty of room for the next president to insist that other countries live up to their commitments to curb emissions, there's no excuse for the science denial being spouted on the campaign trail.
The GOP candidates are like doctors who say an illness is all in a patient's head -- and even if there is a problem, we can't afford to do anything about it.
Actually, given the  mountain of evidence that greenhouse gas emissions are making the Earth sicker by the day, we can't afford not to treat the patient. 



Climate skepticism dogs success of global accord

More than 130 nations signed the Paris climate accord Friday at the United Nations in an effort to combat man-made climate change.
Changes in climate are normal, natural and likely beyond our ability to control. Liberty is rare, precious, hard-earned and within our ability to preserve. If you don't know by now that climate change alarmism is about wealth redistribution, you're just not paying attention.
Felipe Gonzales
I'm not a denier. I'm not even a doubter. But I am extremely skeptical of any "science" that asserts it should never be challenged nor met with any degree of skepticism. It's reminiscent of the old fable "The Emperor's New Clothes."
Stan Gahpa
A reasonable person looking at average global temperatures over the last 100 years should admit Earth is warming. I think it is also clear mankind is contributing to it. The only question is how much is due to mankind and how much is cyclical. Regardless, it is a problem that we have to deal with. Maybe we can't stop it, but we can adapt.
Bob Rejefski
USA TODAY shouldn't have run Weather Channel founder John Coleman's opposing view criticizing the Paris climate agreement as a purely political document. Coleman's article reveals that he is nothing more than the climate equivalent of a Holocaust denier and does not understand the urgent need to stop climate change ("Opposing view: Get politics out of climate debate," Opinion, Friday).
Reuters reported in 2013 on a study that revealed that 97% of scientists agree humans are the main cause behind warming that puts the Earth in peril. Why does USA TODAY give editorial space to people who have so little scientific credibility?
John Kovacs
Golden, Colo.
Paris agreement offers hope for Earth
Twitter
We asked followers what they thought of world leaders signing the Paris climate accord, which aims to slow a rise in greenhouse gases.
Something like this should have been done years ago, but better late than never.
@Newsguy50
A waste of ink. They produced how much carbon flying there? #Hypocrisy
@presleygroupmk
We shouldn't talk about protecting the Earth, rather respecting the Earth. Humans have selfish needs.
@DB2FL
I think it's really cool.
@Bloviatorium
Follow @USATOpinion or #tellusatoday on Twitter. 



U.N. treaty won't fix the climate; The agreement's costs far outweigh its meager benefits for the planet


World leaders disembarked from carbon-spewing jets in New York on Earth Day last Friday to sign the Paris climate treaty, the world's costliest-ever accord.
In line with President Obama, Hillary Clinton says the treaty is a "historic step forward" against "one of the greatest challenges" of our age, while Bernie Sanders argues that it "goes nowhere near far enough."
John Kasich has "serious concerns" that the agreement will hurt the economy; Donald Trump is not a "great believer" in man-made climate change and might ditch the treaty; Ted Cruz says he'd do the same because it was agreed to by "ideologues."
The reality is that we need to respond to the real problem of climate change, but this well-intentioned treaty is a hugely expensive way of doing very little.
Ambitious promises
The accord talks a big game. It doesn't just commit to capping the global temperature increase at 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels. The text says the world's leaders commit to keeping the increase "well below 2 degrees Celsius" and will try to cap it at 1.5 degrees Celsius.
This is just rhetoric. My  research and the only peer-reviewed published assessment of the  agreement used the United Nation's favorite climate model to measure the impact of every nation fulfilling every major carbon-cutting promise in the treaty between now and 2030. I found that the total temperature reduction will be just 0.086 degrees Fahrenheit by 2100.
Even if these promises were extended for 70 more years,  they would reduce temperature rises by 0.3 degrees Fahrenheit by 2100. This is similar to a finding by scientists at MIT. It's feeble.
We will hear claims from green campaigners that the treaty will do a lot more, but we should check their math. Such claims are based on  unrealistic scenarios in which governments do little now but embark on incredibly ambitious carbon reduction policies after 2030. Given that it's hard to know whether the Paris treaty will withstand the results even of this year's U.S. presidential election, it seems foolhardy to predict that governments will suddenly become dramatically more ambitious 15 years from now.
History gives us extra reason for skepticism. The only global treaty to cut carbon -- the Kyoto Protocol --  failed when it was never ratified by the U.S. and was eventually abandoned by Canada, Russia and Japan. Even before then, the treaty had holes in it so big that it was never destined to achieve anything.
Invest in R&d
In the 1990s and  2000s, we learned that the only sure way to make substantial emissions cuts was  a major economic recession. Obviously, we are unlikely to hear even the most climate-alarmed presidential candidate calling for an economic downturn.
By the United Nation's own reckoning, this treaty will  achieve less than 1% of the emission cuts needed to meet its target temperatures. Ninety-nine percent of the problem is left for the leaders of the 2030s to deal with.
And what does it cost to make such feeble cuts? U.S. promises alone -- to cut greenhouse gas emissions 26%-28% below 2005 levels by 2025 -- would reduce gross domestic product more than $150 billion annually.
Trying to cut carbon dioxide, even with an efficient carbon tax, will make cheap energy more expensive, which will slow economic growth. Green technology is still  inefficient (that's why it still requires significant subsidies).
What is needed to solve global warming is a massive increase in green energy technology research and development. This is by far the most effective and efficient way to find  breakthrough  technologies that will be so cheap, they can outcompete fossil fuels. If that happens, we will have fixed global warming, because everyone will switch to those cheaper, green energy sources.
The innovation coalition backed by philanthropist Bill Gates, business leaders and about 20 governments to double global green energy research and development is an excellent initiative and is likely to achieve far more than the Paris treaty. But the Gates fund is just a start. A panel of Nobel laureates for the project Copenhagen Consensus on Climate found that we shouldn't just double R&D but make a tenfold increase, to reach at least $100 billion a year.
Sadly, that will not be the focus of the treaty signed at the U.N. on Earth Day. Amid the political sloganeering for and against, we should bear in mind that we need to respond to climate change, but this treaty will do very little at a very high cost.
Bjorn Lomborg is director of the Copenhagen Consensus Center and a visiting professor at Copenhagen Business School. 



As funding dries up, start-ups start to focus on bottom line; With climate changing, most are just proud to get any backing at all


Foursquare, which became the poster child for slashed start-up valuations when it raised its latest round of funding, is now turning the scenario into a sales pitch.
"Raising $45 million is a testament to how well our company is growing ... only companies with real momentum get funding," Foursquare CEO Jeff Glueck said last week at the Collision tech investing conference. Through services including location-based analysis of consumer spending, Foursquare should triple its market valuation over the next several years, Glueck predicted.
Welcome to high-tech's new math. Forget market valuations, the estimate of how much a private company would be worth in a sale or IPO. When Foursquare raised its latest round of funding, its valuation was marked down 60%, to $250 million, according to estimates published in The Wall Street Journal and other outlets. The point is that it raised money, period.
"Good companies will still raise money in bad environments. The thing we haven't seen is there's a whole generation of entrepreneurs who only have raised money in good times and took really for granted how easy it was," said Saar Gur, general partner at venture capital firm Charles River Ventures, in a USA TODAY podcast. "They're about to get a rude awakening."
A confluence of factors -- a nearly nonexistent tech IPO market, tightening funding and murmurs of an impending bubble -- have start-ups focusing on profits and unsure of when or if the next cash infusion will come. And when they do raise money, the estimated valuation is likely to show investors think the company is worth a lot less than they did two years ago.
That was the clear message among the hundreds of early-stage companies that descended on the Collision conference.
"It is harder to raise money from the venture and IPO markets because the business models (of tech companies) are under more scrutiny," Raj De Datta, CEO of BloomReach, a data science and machine learning company that raised $56 million in funding in January, said in a phone interview.
Glueck wouldn't comment on the new valuation of the firm after its latest round of capital. He's among scores of executives who face the same delicate dance: Raise funds as valuations are scaled back and investors more closely scrutinize profitability, burn rates and long-term business prospects.
Venture capitalists poured $12.1 billion into 969 deals for start-ups in the first quarter this year, down 11% for each category from the same quarter a year ago, according to a report from PricewaterhouseCoopers and the National Venture Capital Association. It isn't quite the dot-com bubble of the early 2000s or the 2008 financial crisis, but it's beginning to feel like it,  execs say.
The IPO of Dell cybersecurity division SecureWorks, the first in tech this year, was flat its first day of trading in April. Ride-sharing service Shuddle shut down last month. Gilt Groupe, a "flash sale" e-commerce company valued at $1 billion in 2011, was sold for $250 million in January to Hudson Bay, owner of Saks Fifth Avenue.
Subscription firm Birchbox announced a 15% workforce reduction, or 45 jobs, in February. Zenefits, once valued at  $4.5 billion, slashed 250 jobs, or 17% of its workforce, also in February.
"It's harder for mediocre start-ups to be funded now than, say, five or even two years ago," added Shama Hyder, an angel investor in female-led tech companies. "There's not as much stupid money. Investors are savvier." 



This soggy Alaska runway is speaking to us


Standing on the suddenly melted runway that was our link to the outside world, I'm getting a first-hand look at how climate change is affecting life on the edge of America.
The gravel runway at Wales has been frozen hard all winter long -- solid ground to land small planes on. But an almost-overnight thaw has turned the hard-packed gravel into a sticky, muddy mess. Until it dries out, the runway is officially off limits. That may take 10 days. Overnight, our link to the outside world had been severed.
Now, while thaws like this happen every year, they usually occur a month later. And although the warmer days are a welcome change from months of frigid temperatures, there's cause for greater concern.
"The weather has changed a lot," says Clyde Oxereok, 57.
Oxereok isn't a climate scientist. He's a ninth-generation resident of the village that looks across the Bering Strait to Russia. A lifelong hunter accustomed to eating walrus, whale and seal, he's finely attuned to the natural world. The things he's telling me are a little scary, when combined with the reporting I've already done across Alaska. Last summer, the state had its second-worst wildfire season in history, and this year's summer is shaping up to be one of the hottest on record.
This spring, I've come to Wales to see how the Inupiat residents of the mainland's westernmost village are adapting to climate change. Experts say places like Wales are among the most susceptible to long-term changes in weather because they're most connected with natural cycles. In Wales, the rise in global temperatures means the sea ice that normally fronts the village for half the year is melting earlier and earlier.
That bears many consequences. It means residents of Little Diomede Island, in the Bering Strait, can no longer consistently land small planes on frozen ocean in front of their village. Now, they largely depend on a helicopter that can land only in good weather. Last year, the helicopter couldn't land for six weeks, and the 110-person island ran out of toilet paper.
The weaker ice is also affecting polar bears, which normally prowl the edges hunting seals. Forced to swim longer distances between ice floes, cubs often drown, and federal scientists are alarmed by the drop in the polar bear populations. Experts say there could be as few as 25,000 of these iconic animals living worldwide.
To help protect the polar bears, the villagers in Wales are working with the World Wildlife Fund to patrol their community with air horns and noisemakers. They hope to scare the bears away from kids walking to and from school in the long dark winter, instead of simply just killing them from a safe distance. It seems like a small thing, but with so few polar bears left alive, literally every bear matters.
For residents of Wales, the polar bears are an integral part of the natural world -- and that natural world is changing around them. Oxereok, a Cold War-era veteran, has left Alaska only twice in his 57 years, once for a high school trip and then again for basic training in Georgia. He's seen plenty of polar bears, but many of the animals and insects native to the Lower 48 never make it this far north. Well, they never used to.
But last year, some of his friends in a nearby village said they'd found grasshoppers on the tundra. Grasshoppers. Near the Arctic Circle.
"Sure enough, they showed me a hopper crossing the road," Oxereok told me. "I'd never seen a grasshopper in Alaska."
Hughes is USA TODAY's Denver-based correspondent. 



Global thermostat just keeps rising; Worldwide, temps hitting records as coral reefs cook


Six months after 195 nations vowed tougher action to curb global warming, the problem has only grown worse, with higher accumulations of greenhouse gas emissions, record worldwide temperatures and widespread coral bleaching from hotter ocean waters.
On top of that, a new United Nations report documents increased pollution levels for the world's cities.
The primary greenhouse gas that leaders at a global summit in Paris last December agreed to reduce -- carbon dioxide (CO2) released from burning of fossil fuels -- is now  fixed above the historic milestone of 400 parts per million that was reached for the first time last year.
The worsening reports come as the United Nations convened a climate conference in Bonn, Germany, on Monday to assess the global warming problem.
In the  Northern Hemisphere, where most of the world's population lives and burns fossil fuels, a benchmark reading from the Mauna Loa volcano in Hawaii reached a monthly average of 407.42 parts per million in April. In the slightly cleaner Southern Hemisphere, readings from an Australian measuring station surpassed 400 parts per million last week, according to  scientists.
The rate of 400 parts per million is significant because the planet hasn't seen that much carbon dioxide in the atmosphere for millions of years.
"This is the new normal. This isn't going away," said Pieter Tans, chief greenhouse gas scientist for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.  "It's like we just set the thermostat at a higher level."
A drumbeat of increasingly hotter temperatures continues. March was the 11th straight record-setting month for global temperatures, according to NOAA, the longest streak in 137 years of gathering data.
Tans said a direct result of accumulating CO2 is warmer, more acidic ocean waters creating havoc with coral formations by bleaching great stretches of reefs in the world's oceans. The bleaching occurs when algae that live inside and nourish coral, providing their brilliant colors, wither from the warming waters and die, leaving behind white coral skeletons.
The algae can return in some cases as temperatures decline. But episodes of coral bleaching have become far more widespread.
The 1,400-mile-long Great Barrier Reef of northeastern Australia has been decimated in recent months.
Aerial and underwater surveys reveal that 93% of it has suffered some level of bleaching, according to the Australian-based ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies.
About 81% of the reef's northern third has severe bleaching, researchers found.
More recently, a U.N. World Health Organization report released Thursday found that 98% of the moderate and poor cities with more than 100,000 people live each day with poor air quality that violates health standards. 



For climate's sake, don't give up on reactors


Illinois is the latest example of a state losing nuclear energy facilities -- a major component of our clean energy mix -- when we most need zero-carbon electricity to cut pollution and meet our climate change goals.
The premature closure of the Clinton and Quad Cities nuclear power plants means that Illinois, like California before it, is about to face increased carbon emissions and harmful air pollution.
This should be reason enough for us to continue a long-term investment in nuclear energy.
It might be too late for Illinois, but it is not too late for states such as New York, Connecticut, Ohio and others that are considering closures as a result of market forces that have made nuclear plants less competitive.
Yet 10 reactors in the U.S. are already fully decommissioned or have announced they will close in the next few years. And up to 20 more are at risk of closure in the next decade. If we lose 30 facilities in the next 10 years, that would causethe loss of a quarter of the carbon reduction gains achieved by the Clean Power Plan and about 45% of U.S. carbon reduction commitments made at the climate conference in Paris.
These loses are also bad news for our health and for our efforts to reduce air pollution. Consider that when the San Onofre nuclear plant in Southern California closed in 2013, carbon dioxide emissions jumped by nearly 11 million tons in 2012 due to the switch to natural gas-fueled power plants.
Energy Secretary Ernest Moniz recently expressed concern over the shuttering of nuclear facilities. "We are supposed to be adding zero-carbon sources, not subtracting," he said.
The facts are clear: Nuclear energy is by far the largest source of carbon-free electricity. That means it provides clean energy 24/7 and in all kinds of weather. It annually prevents hundreds of millions of tons of carbon from entering our atmosphere. Nuclear energy nationwide produces more than 60% of all carbon-free electricity, so overall carbon emissions from the electricity sector would be 27% higher.
Undeniably, renewables play a significant role in the future of America's clean energy economy. However, with electricity demand forecast to grow 22% by 2040, nuclear energy must continue to be a significant part of our clean-electricity portfolio. In addition, studies show that when nuclear energy facilities close prematurely, they are more often replaced by emitting natural gas-fueled power plants, not other clean energy sources.
The federal government, states and electricity market organizations should be working to develop an electricity mix that is clean, diverse, sustainable, efficient and affordable.  We must continue to support and encourage all forms of zero-carbon energy  and accept nuclear energy as an important part of the clean energy effort.
Ronald Kirk served as U.S. trade representative and Dallas mayor. Christine Todd Whitman was administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency and New Jersey governor. They are co-chairs of the Clean and Safe Energy Coalition, which promotes nuclear energy. 



Sanders ready to take a stand to push for 'progressive' platform


Sen. Bernie Sanders says he is prepared for a floor fight at the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia if the party doesn't take more "progressive" stances on trade, the minimum wage, climate change and other issues in its platform.
The Vermont senator told USA TODAY that  there are "a lot of very good and progressive" provisions in the document approved Saturday in St. Louis by the 15-member Platform Drafting Committee, which includes supporters of Sanders and presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton.
But Sanders and his supporters will work with labor, environmental and human rights groups to call for amendments when the draft goes to the full 187-member Platform Committee for final approval in Orlando July 8 and 9. If he doesn't succeed there, Sanders said he will have the votes to bring amendments to the convention floor.
He acknowledged it would be easier if his changes were adopted in Orlando. A floor fight at the convention could prolong it.
"The middle class of this country has been in decline for 40 years and we need to make it clear that we stand with working families in this country and we are prepared to take on powerful special interests," he said. "That is what the Democratic Party has got to stand for."
Sanders has said he will vote for Clinton, but he hasn't endorsed her or conceded his bid for the Democratic nomination. 



U.S. bases under threat from rising seas; Tidal flooding and storm surge could cause a 2,600% increase in the number of flooding events, report says


Military bases along the East and Gulf coasts are at risk of losing large chunks of land as rising sea levels from man-made climate change swamp installations from New Hampshire to Florida.
The onslaught of water will come from both tidal flooding and hurricane storm surge and could cause a 2,600% increase in the number of annual flooding events on several bases in the U.S. in coming decades, according to a report released Wednesday by the Union of Concerned Scientists.
Sea level increases -- already up 8 inches globally since 1880 -- are the result of warming temperatures and ice melt caused by heat-trapping greenhouse gases. The phenomenon doesn't occur evenly worldwide. The East and Gulf coasts in the U.S. experience some of the fastest rates of sea-level rise, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
The Union of Concerned Scientists found that by 2050, half of the 18 East and Gulf coasts military installations it analyzed would experience 270 or more flood events per year -- up from just 10 events annually today.
Four bases in Florida, Virginia and South Carolina could lose 20% or more of their land in the same time period, said Erika Spanger-Siegfried, lead author of the report, which used peer-reviewed scientific research and other projections to make the predictions.
"Military bases and personnel protect the country, often providing rescue services in dangerous floods and other natural disasters," the report states. "Our defense leadership has a special responsibility to protect the sites that hundreds of thousands of Americans depend on for their livelihoods and millions depend on for national security."
Over the past century, sea level climbed a foot or more in some U.S. cities because of  ocean currents and land subsidence, a gradual settling or sudden sinking of the Earth's surface because of underground movement of soil and dirt.
Scientists don't know exactly how much higher the waters will climb, but many project global sea level will rise about 1 foot to slightly more than 3 feet by 2100, according to the most recent assessment report by the United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. NOAA predicts sea level could rise higher, by as much as 61/2 feet, by century's end.
"The Pentagon knows it has a problem, and some bases are already making an effort to reduce their exposure," Spanger-Siegfried said. Langley Air Force base in Norfolk, Va., for example, is raising electrical equipment and installing flood barriers and pumps, among other efforts, she added.
Not all of the bases the environmental group analyzed responded to the report, but of those that did, Spanger-Siegfried said she was "surprised how much some places were so acutely aware of the issues."
"But there's a big gap between what's being done and what's needed," she added.
Air Force Lt. Col. Eric Badger, a spokesman for the Pentagon, said the Defense Department was aware of the report but had no immediate comment. 



A bird's-eye view of climate change


On a remote, craggy cliff 18 miles off the coast of Maine, a parent waits. Weepy-eyed and web-footed, the pudgy, painted puffin braces against a capricious wind -- and fickle foothold.
At last count, hardscrabble Eastern Egg Rock was home to 150 breeding pairs of Atlantic puffins, each vying to incubate a one-per-season puffball in burrows carved beneath boulders. Having clawed back from the brink -- in 1901, only one puffin pair remained in Maine -- climate change is now poised to do its own number on these charismatic birds. As last month's scientific audit, "The State of North America's Birds" warns, 49% of the continent's seabirds are caught up in the crisis.
Thursday night, Gene Karpinski, head of the League of Conservation Voters, will speak to climate change at the Democratic National Convention. The issue has put politicians at odds, galvanized voters and saddled scientists with a burden of proof.
Birds are used to being in human's sights. Not too long ago, our  American bald eagle was in danger of vanishing in a puff. Patriotic symbolism couldn't shield it from human activity: hunting, habitat squandering, pesticide use. It took the Endangered Species Act of 1973 to restore that  bird to its perch of power.
Also in 1973, a young ornithologist -- a diminutive Don Quixote named Stephen Kress -- got into the recovery act.
"It was love at first sight," Kress, 70, says of first viewing puffins as a teen near the U.S.-Canadian border. He learned they once flourished in Maine, the southernmost limit of their range, but by 1885 the effects of agri-fishers raiding the henhouse, daily plucking eggs from rocky crevices and laying nets on ledges to snare meaty adults, had taken a grievous toll.
Not abiding by fate, Kress negotiated with the Canadians for six puffin chicks to try re-colonizing 7-acre Eastern Egg Rock. Backed by the National Audubon Society and Barbara's, maker of Puffins cereal, he worked through the decades-long "jigsaw puzzle" of Project Puffin. Their team hand-reared "pufflings" with vitamin-fortified fish in man-made burrows and stationed interns  from May to August to keep predators, like eagles, at bay. Fledged puffins set out on two- to three-year sea cruises while scientists set up sound recordings,  decoys and mirrors to lure them home.
And waited.
Eight years later, the first prodigal puffin pair returned to roost. Things were looking pretty peachy  until waters in the Gulf of Maine began rising faster than 99% of the Earth's oceans, Kress says,  throwing delicate fish populations out of whack.
Audubon's annual Christmas bird count reveals nearly 350 North American birds are "climate-affected," moving farther north. "For those species that are already farther north, they've got nowhere to go," Kress says. "Their fate, their future, really is in our hands."
Last weekend, I saw it firsthand, setting foot on the puffins' hallowed breeding grounds, a towering babble of gulls, guillemots and terns situated 17 precarious feet above sea level.
An all-female summer squad  yanked us ashore. Among their duties: Daily at 0600, one climbs atop the  shack, ironically dubbed "The Hilton," for a bird census. They label active burrows, tag birds and monitor avian diets and growth. By luck, we spy an adult puffin whiz by at high speed, a bowtie of sushi dangling from its slack-jawed rainbow beak, only to disappear underground. Interns fish out the baby for inspection. Puffin chicks' weights are steadily declining, they sadly report.
The changes for these colorful birds come in dribs and drabs.
"Ocean conservation is a hard thing for people to understand because it's happening underwater, and you can't see most of it," Kress explains. "But seabirds are above ground, so we can see through their eyes."
Dimpled, tears-of-a-clown eyes. In ill-fitting waistcoats, they wait. For a meal. A mate. Another morning.
Ever facing forward, because, to quote Emily Dickinson, "hope is the thing with feathers."
Byrne is fledgling birder and a multiplatform editor at USA TODAY. 



Clinton, Trump show stark contrast on climate change; Dem's warning of major crisis derided by GOP candidate as radical


Presidential candidates Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump offer Americans starkly different views on global warming: Clinton says it is an urgent concern. Trump dismisses it as a minor problem.
"There's never been a bigger contrast between the two candidates and the two platforms," said Tiernan Sittenfeld, senior vice president of the League of Conservation Voters.
The Trump campaign decried Clinton's policy proposals  Tuesday as an "extreme, reckless anti-energy agenda ... to appease radical donors (who) will destroy millions of jobs and force millions more into abject poverty."
The GOP nominee said nothing about climate change in his acceptance speech July 21 at the Republican National Convention. He told a rally in South Carolina in December that global warming was "a hoax, a lot of it," a modest change from a tweet in 2013 that called global warming "bulls---."
He's rejected climate science even though climate is  thoroughly researched, said Jeremy Symons of the Environmental Defense Action Fund.
"Climate change is real," the Democratic nominee said in her acceptance speech Thursday. Clinton said she was proud the United States had signed a climate accord in Paris that commits the world's nations to slow the rise of greenhouse gases blamed for warming the climate.
Clinton "cares deeply about protecting public health and the environment," Sittenfeld said
The gap between presidential candidates has grown since the 2008 election, when GOP nominee John McCain expressed concern about climate change, said Kevin Curtis, executive director of the Natural Resources Defense Council Action Fund.
Clinton's campaign website has more than 30 pages of proposals for fighting climate change. They include installing a half-billion solar panels by the end of her term and ensuring that every U.S. home is powered by renewable energy within 10 years.
Those goals are "ambitious," Curtis said. "And we think that's great. If she's elected, we'll be badgering her to do more."
Trump has promised to slash funding for the Environmental Protection Agency. Last week, he was asked on Fox News if global warming was caused by human activity. "It could have a minor impact," Trump said. "But nothing, nothing to what they're talking about."
The Sierra Club issued a paper July 12 saying that if elected, Trump would be the only world leader who did not believe in the science of climate change.
"Leaders of all nations accept the scientific consensus that man is fueling climate change by burning fossil fuels and are calling for urgent action," the report states. Support comes from leaders of 195 countries, including North Korean dictator Kim Jong Un.
"We wanted to be very clear about where Donald Trump ranks among other world leaders, and he's at the very bottom," said Michael Brune, executive director of the Sierra Club.
Trump spokesman Jason Miller said  the Sierra Club "lobbies for the closure of American coal mines and celebrates the loss of countless, good-paying energy jobs for American workers."
The platforms adopted by the Republican and Democratic Parties underscore the candidates' glaring differences.
The Republicans emphasize American energy independence. Their platform advocates reviving construction of the Keystone XL Pipeline, which would bring crude oil from Canada to Nebraska, and killing an EPA plan to reduce power plant emissions. It seeks to take regulatory control away from the federal government and give it to the states.
Though the party encourages the development of renewable energy sources such as wind and solar, it says it should be done entirely by private capital. It says coal is clean, an assertion that rankles environmentalists.
"It is a fantasy and wishful thinking," Symons said. "Coal kills thousands of people a year."
The Democratic platform says climate change "is an urgent threat and a defining challenge of our time" and takes dire note of rising seas, brutal drought, "superstorms" and multiplying wildfires. It argues that embracing clean energy technology will create "millions of new jobs" and cut home and business expenses.
"It's the most pro-environment platform we've ever seen," Sittenfeld said.
The libertarian Cato Institute calls the Democratic platform "chock full of government actions that promise to initiate, broaden and extend the current set of rules, regulations and orders seeking to reduce ... our reliance on fossil fuels as our primary source of energy production."
"A Democratic administration will seek a further expansion of the reach of the federal government into our daily lives," the institute said on its website.
Decades ago, Sittenfeld noted, environment issues enjoyed bipartisan support. The Clean Water Act of 1972 was passed with support from both parties and signed into law by President Richard Nixon, a Republican.
Whether the sharp divide between Trump and Clinton will move voters is unclear. Though the number of voters who say they believe in climate change has increased -- including 47% of conservatives -- the percentage "alarmed" by global warming is still small, said research scientist Anthony Leiserowitz, director of the Yale Program on Climate Change Communication.
"American engagement with this issue is at levels that we haven't seen since the latest high water mark in 2008," he said. 



Global warming may unleash radioactive waste from secret base; Frozen toxic sewage could emerge one day


Global warming is slowly thawing out a once top-secret U.S. nuclear test site in northern Greenland, potentially exposing the environment to radioactive coolant, PCBs and raw sewage that the military originally believed would stay entombed for millennia.
The hazardous waste from an abandoned subterranean U.S. military base in northern Greenland could emerge by the end of the century, which experts say will turn into both an environmental and a political headache.
This is according to a new, peer-reviewed study published Thursday in Geophysical Research Letters, a journal of the American Geophysical Union.
Camp Century was a U.S. base built on the Greenland ice sheet in 1959. To the public, its mission was scientific, and includes such tasks as drilling for ice cores. But it also doubled as a top-secret site for testing nuclear missiles during the height of the Cold War. It was a test base to see whether launch sites could be built close enough for missiles to reach the Soviet Union. The project was named Project Iceworm.
When the camp was decommissioned in 1967, the base and its waste, including radioactive coolant, tons of PCBs and thousands of gallons of sewage and diesel fuel, were abandoned, thinking they'd be entombed for millennia by winter snowfall.
Indeed, since being abandoned, at least another 100 feet of snow has fallen on top of that.
"Two generations ago, people were interring waste in different areas of the world, and now climate change is modifying those sites," said Liam Colgan, a climate scientist at York University in Toronto, Canada, and lead author of the study.
Climate change has warmed the Arctic more than any other region on Earth, and the portion of the ice sheet covering Camp Century should start to melt by the end of the century, according to the study.
The waste would then seep into the ocean. This would threaten the ecosystems of the fish and animals that the people who live in the communities there depend on, said Mike MacFerrin, a study co-author. 



Shell CEO sees red lights on path to greener energy; Oil giant cites struggle of curbing emissions as demand grows


It's no surprise major oil companies are viewed as contrarians when it comes to climate change, even though all of them acknowledge the phenomenon and agree on the need for a response to one extent or another.
After all, keeping temperatures from rising to catastrophic levels will require the world to wean itself off fossil fuels and turn to cleaner forms of energy, hardly an appealing proposition to the financial well-being of oil producers. But now the leader of one of the world's biggest oil companies is telling his peers to accept the role unapologetically.
"When it comes to some of the beliefs about the challenge of the energy transition, which may be founded on less than solid fact, our industry should not shy away from being the contrarian in the room," Ben van Beurden, the chief executive of Royal Dutch Shell, told an oil conference in Norway recently.
"All of us here today have a pivotal role to play in shaping the energy system of the future. With our knowledge, we have some indispensable -- and you could say, contrarian -- insights to offer."
With that, van Beurden ticked off the difficulties of curbing emissions as demand for energy grows, especially in developing countries.
"The underlying question is: How far can countries transform their economies to meet demand and reduce emissions at the same time?" he asked. "And, crucially: How fast can they do that?
"Social, political and geographical conditions vary from country to country. So the energy transition is likely to play out in a different way in different places. ... In some places, it will be relatively fast; in others, relatively slow."
Oil, coal and natural gas -- the primary culprits behind climate change -- will remain essential on a large scale for years for long-distance air travel, heavy road transportation, steelmaking and other sectors, he said in remarks prepared for the Offshore Northern Seas Conference in Stavanger on Aug. 29.
His speech came six days before President Obama and China President Xi Jinping formally entered their two nations into last year's Paris climate agreement, which aims to hold the increase in the global average temperature to below 2 degrees Celsius compared to preindustrial levels.
Obama calls the landmark accord "the single best chance we have" to save the planet.
The Anglo-Dutch company is no opponent of the climate deal; in fact, Shell has taken a formal position that the agreement "could provide greater certainty about how the world can provide more energy with much less carbon dioxide."
Nor is Shell absent when it comes to lower-carbon and no-carbon alternatives.
With its $52 billion acquisition of BG Group earlier this year, Shell became the world's top liquefied natural gas company at a time when gas, which emits half the carbon dioxide of coal, is displacing coal as a fuel for electricity generation around the globe.
The company backs projects in Norway, Canada and other countries seeking commercially viable ways of capturing carbon emissions from coal- and gas-burning power plants and burying them deep underground. In fact, the 109-year-old oil giant sees itself becoming gradually greener.
"As we have explained to our investors, new energies like wind, hydrogen and biofuels will become essential parts of our portfolio over time," van Beurden said.
But despite dire warnings by scientists of the potential for a climate catastrophe if the rise in temperatures isn't curbed relatively soon, and his own company's acknowledgment of the problem, van Beurden cautions that suggestions of a quick fix can be deceptive.
"In other words," he concluded, "this century's landscape will inevitably be a patchwork of renewables and hydrocarbons. Or, to put it differently, some level of emissions will remain for some time." 



Climate change fueled deadly rainstorm


Climate change played a major role in the historic rainfall that caused catastrophic flooding in Louisiana last month, nearly doubling the chance of such a deluge taking place, according to a fast-tracked federal report released Wednesday.
Many spots picked up more than 2 feet of rain in the state, which was drenched by about 7.1trillion gallons of water, three times the amount Hurricane Katrina dumped there in 2005.
An estimated 30,000 people needed to be rescued from floodwaters that killed 13 people and damaged 60,000 homes in what the Red Cross called the nation's worst natural disaster since 2012.
Human-cased, heat-trapping greenhouses played a "measurable" role in the colossal rainfall totals, which were fueled by high humidity and a stalled storm system above the Gulf Coast, said Karin van der Wiel, a scientist from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the report's lead author.
The burning of fossil fuels such as oil, gas and coal releases greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide into the Earth's atmosphere, which has warmed to levels that cannot be explained by natural variability, scientists say. Rainfall patterns and humidity levels are also affected by this process, as warmer air can hold additional amounts of water vapor.
Computer models analyzed the amount of rain that caused the flooding, van der Wiel said. The rainfall Louisiana experienced "is now expected to occur at least 40% more often" than before the mid-1800s, the report stated.
The report is an example of a single-event attribution study released rapidly to catch the public's eye while an extreme weather event is  fresh in people's minds, NOAA said.
The information is also critical to insurers, policymakers, engineers and emergency managers to prepare for more climate-change-fueled events down the road, said Heidi Cullen, chief scientist at Climate Central, an independent climate science and news organization.
The study has been submitted to Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, an interactive, open access journal of the European Geosciences Union. 



Today's weather is hardly unique


A recent study out of Princeton shows that whether people feel global warming is making hurricanes worse is more related to political predilections than reality, while global trends show no change. But what about global temperatures, Louisiana's disastrous flood and California's incandescent fire season?
Since satellites began measuring lower-atmosphere temperatures in 1979, the observed warming has been only one-third of what would have been forecast by today's computer models, and the rate of surface warming has even slowed since the late 1990s, according to the new "homogenized" temperature history from the Commerce Department.
Make no mistake, though, carbon dioxide concentrations have increased and surface temperatures are high, compared with the last 150 years, and the three-dimensional patterns of change (latitude, longitude and altitude) are partially consistent with that increase. So, when there is a natural warming event, like the recent El Nio, it superimposes upon already warm temperatures and results in a record, globally and sometimes locally.
That's hard to dispute. But glib attributions of recent weather (as opposed to "climate") phenomena are more wishful than reality. Last month, Commerce Department scientists showed rain data vary so much that "no evidence was found for changes in extreme precipitation attributable to climate change in the available observed record." What's good for the U.S. is also good for Louisiana.
Another group of researchers showed that California's strong recent warming, which raises the likelihood of drought and enhanced wildfires, is best explained by oceanic temperature patterns from which any carbon dioxide signal had been removed.
And, are today's high temperatures unique in human history? There's strong evidence that the Arctic Ocean could have experienced long periods of ice-free summers for approximately four millennia after the end of the last ice age (6,000-10,000 years ago) and some evidence it was globally warmer 1,000 years ago, too.
That's science, and not what we fear may be true based upon our personal philosophy.
Patrick J. Michaels directs the Center for the Study of Science at the Cato Institute. 



More willing to pay to fight climate change, survey says; 57% would pay $1 more on electric bill for climate action


How much would you pay on your electric bill to combat climate change?
Is $10 or $20 a month reasonable? $50 too much?
Or, maybe you're unwilling to shell out anything at all.
A new survey offers some insight regarding the extent to which Americans consider climate change a legitimate threat and how much they're willing to pay for government policies that would respond to the phenomena.
Conducted by the Energy Policy Institute at the University of Chicago (EPIC) and The Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research, the inquiry found that 65% of Americans think climate change is a problem that the government needs to address, including 84% of Democrats and 43% of Republicans.
Those findings are consistent with previous polls on the topic. But what's different in this survey is its look at Americans' willingness to reach into their own pockets to help keep temperatures from rising to dangerous levels.
In all, 57% of those polled said they would pay at least $1 more on their monthly electric bill for climate action, including 29% who would pay $20 a month, an amount comparable to federal government estimates of damages from climate change per household.
Twenty percent indicated they would pay $50.
Clearly, resistance to footing a higher electric bill is considerable, too, with 42% of the respondents saying they were unwilling to pay even $1 for such policies. One percent of the participants didn't respond to the question.
Party affiliation is the main determinant of how much cost people would bear, not education, income or geographic location, with Democrats consistently willing to pay more than Republicans, the survey's authors said.
Still, the findings indicate more public support for paying for climate policies such as a carbon tax, a cap-and-trade plan or other regulation than may have been evident before, according to Michael Greenstone, the director of EPIC.
"I think what this says is that quietly there is developing a change in peoples' attitudes with respect to paying for climate policy," Greenstone said in an interview.
"I found it striking that one in five households were willing to pay $50 a month," he added.
Among other survey results:
54% of Americans (67% of Democrats and 46% of Republicans) favor federal regulations that would reduce U.S. coal use, though that support slips to 45% when the question is paired with the assertion that such regulations have resulted in the loss of coal jobs;
Only a quarter of Americans are confident that the U.S. will meet its obligations under an international climate agreement reached in Paris last December, but eight in 10 say the country should still try to meet those responsibilities.
Coming just two months before the November elections, the EPIC-AP survey concludes that energy and climate change are "important issues" for about half of likely voters as they cast their ballots.
Moreover, the results raise questions about the extent of local support for a legal challenge of Obama administration climate policy by 24 states.
Still, in an election year when the personalities of the Democratic and Republican nominees for president attract more attention than specific issues, it's difficult to determine how much public perceptions on an issue like climate change may play a part in determining which candidate wins.
The survey wasn't limited to climate change; it also probed public opinions on the use of hydraulic fracturing to produce gas from shale formations -- one which has led to record gas output in the U.S. in recent years.
Of the six in 10 respondents who had an opinion on fracking, twice as many oppose the practice as support it. Not surprising, the disapproval is much more prevalent among Democrats than Republicans.
"I think fracking is still pretty new," Greenstone said. "Outside of the communities where it's taking place, I think those views are probably still evolving."
Loveless is a veteran energy journalist and podcast host in Washington. He is the former anchor of the TV program Platts Energy Week. 



Tough love is needed on climate change


Launching into coverage of climate change right now is like tuning into a football game that's half over and your team is on its way to losing. The only question is by how much.
Even if every word of last December's breakthrough Paris Agreement is implemented and global warming is slowed, according to climate scientists I've interviewed, nations might moderate the planetary abuse caused by generations of mankind pumping greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, ocean, plants and soil.
At best, a catastrophe might be averted, they say.
But theirs is the joy of a patient learning that a diagnosis may not be terminal -- only crippling. It's a reality reflected in the hooded expression of my youngest son, Noah, when the topic arises. At 20, he realizes all too well the world we've left his generation.
"We're committed to a path that is taking us into parts unknown, and there's no turning back," says Gavin Schmidt, a NASA climatologist. "There are only choices about how much of an unknown situation we put ourselves in."
The Paris Agreement, since signed by 180 nations, would limit global warming by the year 2100 to "well below" 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees F), compared with pre-industrial levels.
An added push for a 1.5-degree limit could make a huge positive difference for the planet.
But even at that stricter limit, Earth still will see rising sea levels, persistent droughts, species extinction and volatile weather patterns, the climate specialists say.
"The world has already signed itself up for some level of climatic impact," says Nick Nuttall, spokesman for the U.N. Climate Change secretariat. "The amount of pollution amassed over the two centuries of industrialization -- you can't just suck it up with a vacuum cleaner."
Oh, if only it were 1980, says Katherine Hayhoe.
Hayhoe, director of the Climate Science Center at Texas Tech University, says a Paris Agreement and the renewable energy efforts gaining speed today would have had a profound impact on a far less sullied planet 35 years ago.
"Our carbon dioxide levels now are over 400 parts per million," Hayhoe says, referring to what scientists says is a historic milestone reached this past year for a gas that is shrouding the planet like a blanket. "Our global temperature changes are already pushing 1 degree Celsius."
In the past, scientists warning of climate change were labeled alarmists. But most of their calculations are proving to be accurate.
If anything, they have underestimated the changes underway. A 2012 analysis at the University of Alberta in Canada found a scientific bias in climate research toward "erring on the side of least drama."
Climate scientist Michael Mann -- co-author of the new book The Madhouse Effect, about the threat posed by denialism -- says many uncertainties concerning global warming "appear to be breaking against us, rather than for us."
"Arctic sea ice is disappearing faster than the models projected," he says. "The continental ice sheets (in Greenland and the Antarctic) are losing ice faster than expected."
Another surprise was uncovered in a study Mann co-authored last year in Climate Nature Change.
It found disturbing evidence that a North Atlantic current crucial in controlling weather patterns was slowing, possibly because of an influx of fresh water from melting ice in Greenland.
So much needs to be done so quickly that the Paris treaty goals for limiting warming may already be unattainable.
"I would say people are pretty pessimistic about that. I've not found anybody that actually thinks 1.5 (degrees Celsius) is at all realistic" because too much of society remains unwilling or unable to act, says NASA climatologist Schmidt.
What's needed now is some tough love on the topic. "The earth is going to look like a different place," says Peter Tans, chief greenhouse gas scientist for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. "It's very scary stuff."
"We need to be upfront with our children," Mann says. "Such a world would not be unlike the dystopian worlds depicted by Hollywood in movies like Soylent Green or The Hunger Games. Fortunately such a future is still avoidable. The challenge is to act. Now."
Zoroya covers climate change for USA TODAY. 



French winemakers can raise a glass to global warming; Warmer summers mean riper grapes


Near this medieval town in southwestern France, the Chteau Rochebelle and its Grand Cru vines have produced red wines under the watchful eye of the Faniest family since 1847.
The owner, Philippe Faniest, has high hopes for his latest stock, thanks to a warming climate's beneficial impact on the Bordeaux wine-producing district.
"The 2015 vintage is one of the very best years," he boasted. "It will be a wine that can be kept for 30 years."
Faniest said he anticipates that the 2016 grapes, yet to be picked, will go down in history, too: "The 2016 vintage will be a great year because we had so much sun."
Bordeaux's fortunes have been on the rise in recent decades, as "good years" such as 2015 have become more frequent.
That's because warmer summers mean the fruit ripens quicker. Instead of in October, the grapes can be harvested sometimes in September, which is more likely to be dry.
If there are heavy rains just before or during harvest, the fruit swells and dilutes, which inevitably makes the wine less palatable, according to wine experts.
"People are very happy in Bordeaux and in vineyards all the way up to Champagne," said Benjamin Bois, a researcher at the University of Burgundy who focuses on climate and how it affects wine production. "I wouldn't say they're foolish."
The Met Office, the United Kingdom's weather service, said French temperatures have risen by  0.65 degrees Fahrenheit per decade since 1960, and this warming is likely to continue.
Beatrice Laurensan, an assistant director at the Chteau la Gafflire vineyard in St. milion, said all the 2015 vintage wine has been sold. She said the increasingly warmer summers have been good for the harvests.
"We don't beg people to buy our wine. They come knocking on our door," she bragged. "The term 'bad vintage' is gone."
Bois warned that although climate change may have been kind to Bordeaux wines, it will eventually push the good years further apart as temperatures rise. Bordeaux needs only to look to its southern neighbors. "Mediterranean regions, including Chteauneuf du Pape, already have water stress" because of lack of rain, he said. 



Carbon tax vote could be a model for U.S.; Nov. 8 referendum in Washington state is good start, expert says


Putting a price on carbon emissions remains a divisive topic in the USA, even as polls indicate considerable public support for actions to address climate change.
Voters in Washington state may show the way Nov. 8 when they decide on a referendum that would assess a carbon tax on coal, oil and natural gas, a move aimed at lowering emissions that contribute to climate change without digging deeply into people's wallets.
Backed by a campaign called Carbon Washington, the initiative is designed to be revenue-neutral, gradually increasing the carbon tax while reducing sales and other state taxes. A similar levy was established by neighboring British Columbia in 2008.
Initiative 732 is stirring up controversy in the Pacific Northwest state, and polls show that its outcome on Election Day is uncertain. If enacted, it would be the first state carbon tax in the USA.
Among those pointing to the referendum as a possible prototype for the USA as a whole is Clay Sell, a former top energy official under President George W. Bush.
Sell told a Washington, D.C., audience the other day that it's time to end the political debate over the cause of climate change and address the phenomenon with a business-friendly policy.
"The great challenge for the next administration using the bully pulpit will be to end this fiction, act upon the science and design a carbon pricing scheme that will provide the certainty and efficiency that energy investors desire," Sell told a forum held by the U.S. Energy Association.
"I hope both (political) parties will take that up, as it will allow the benefits of all clean energy technologies to be properly valued in the marketplace," he said.
To be clear, Sell has a vested interest in clean energy as the president of Hunt Energy Horizons, the renewable energy subsidiary of Hunt Consolidated, a Dallas-based energy, real estate and investment corporation controlled by billionaire Ray  Hunt, whose family's fortune began with oil.
Nonetheless, Sell, who was the deputy secretary of the  Department of Energy from 2005 to 2008 and an energy adviser to Bush before that, said interest in a carbon price is growing among business executives, even if it hasn't reached all corners of the oil and gas industry.
"If I were to take you to the wildcatters' dinner at the Petroleum Club, you would not find me in the broad majority," he said when I asked him how his views go over in Dallas. "But people need certainty."
Sell criticized the "patchwork of overlapping subsidies, mandates and tax benefits" that federal, state and local governments established over the years to promote clean energy and reduce emissions.
Among the mistakes, he maintained, is the Obama administration's Clean Power Plan, which would cut carbon emissions from power plants but not other sectors, such as transportation. He called it "completely inadequate" to manage the "global impacts" of carbon emissions.
That plan, developed by the  Environmental Protection Agency after Congress failed to pass climate legislation, is challenged in court by 24 states.
Sell was just as critical of those in the Republican Party and elsewhere who resist a consensus among scientists that human behavior is the leading cause of climate change. Among them is the GOP nominee for president, Donald Trump.
"I think we need to work more to restore and defend the primacy of science in all policy discussions and decisions," Sell said. "Now, for those Democrats in the room, you may be saying, 'Of course, that's what we've been saying for years on climate change. When are you Republicans going to come around?'
"And I will tell you, I think the Republicans should come around on the primacy of science on that issue," he said.
"But you know what? People need to come around on the primacy of science as it relates to hydraulic fracturing (for oil and gas drilling), on the primacy of science on what it tells us about Yucca Mountain (in Nevada) and its suitability as a permanent repository for spent nuclear fuel, and for other projects and initiatives where we allow politics to trump science."
In the meantime, look to the Pacific Northwest, Sell suggested.
"I think there are some lessons that could be learned from the initiative in Washington state about a revenue-neutral carbon tax," he said.
Loveless is a veteran energy journalist and podcast host in Washington. He is the former anchor of the TV program Platts Energy Week. 



3 debates, and barely a mention of climate change

Aside from the possibility that mankind will blow itself up, no issue is more important to the long-term future of the planet than global warming. Rising sea levels, devastating flooding, heat waves and droughts are already causing human misery and economic disruption. Yet discussion of climate change has been oddly lacking from the seemingly endless presidential campaign.
In the three  debates, the topic was mentioned only fleetingly. At the second debate, the red sweater worn by town hall audience member Ken Bone attracted far more attention than the candidates' response to his question about energy policy.
The lack of attention to the issue is disappointing, but not surprising. Human-induced climate change doesn't lend itself to brief sounds bites, and political systems are particularly unsuited to dealing with this kind of problem.
For one thing, global warming is a slow-motion crisis that will unfold, largely invisibly, over decades. No individual extreme weather event -- this week's record heat in the East, or the excessive rainfall in the Carolinas from Hurricane Matthew -- can be conclusively linked to human disruption of the climate.
Moreover, as with pension promises to public employees, today's politicians will be long gone when the worst effects manifest themselves. The powerful fossil fuel lobby resists change; it underwrites organizations that challenge the science and confuse the public. And no individual city, state or nation can solve the climate problem; that will take a global effort in which individual countries have economic incentives to cheat on their emissions-reduction pledges.
Given all these obstacles, the progress of the past year has actually been remarkable. Last year's Paris treaty to curb greenhouse gas emissions has been ratified by 81 parties and is set to take effect on Nov. 4. A narrower agreement limits emissions from jetliners. And, last weekend in Rwanda, more than 170 nations agreed to phase out powerful, heat-trapping refrigerants known as hydrofluorocarbons.
Continued progress depends in large part on U.S. leadership, the extent of which will depend on the outcome of the presidential election. As on so many other issues, the candidates have diametrically opposed positions.
Democrat Hillary Clinton thinks climate change is real; she says she'd work with international leaders to stabilize and reduce emissions, and with local leaders to invest in flood-protection projects.
Republican Donald Trump, meanwhile, has said that he's "not a great believer in man-made climate change," that he would cancel the Paris climate agreement, and that there are bigger risks to worry about.
Certainly, there is room for discussion about the precise degree to which human activity is contributing to global warming. There is also room for debate on the best ways to address the problem. But Trump's blithe dismissal of the overwhelming scientific consensus on climate change is yet one more reason the Republican nominee ought not be president. 



'Warming is mild and manageable'


Should Chris Wallace have asked our presidential candidates about climate change? Absolutely, but only as part of a broader discussion of the role of fossil fuels in America's energy future.
"Climate change" -- more precisely, man-made warming -- is a side effect of using fossil fuels for cheap, plentiful, reliable energy. To ask candidates to address climate change without addressing the unique benefits of fossil fuels is like asking the candidates to address vaccine side effects without addressing the unique benefits of vaccines.
The question Wallace should have asked is: "Given your assessment of the benefits and risks of fossil fuels, including the effects of warming, what is the right energy policy for America?"
Energy is the industry that powers every other industry. Cheap, plentiful, reliable energy makes possible cheap, plentiful, reliable food, drinking water, sanitation, transportation and housing.
In a world where more than 1billion people have no electricity and a much larger number live in deep "energy poverty," only the fossil fuel industry has developed the ability to produce energy for electricity, fuel and heat on a scale of billions. The politically popular alternatives, solar and wind, are expensive "unreliables" that depend on reliable sources, mostly fossil fuels, for life support.
In America, the fossil fuel  industry has been the indispensable supporter of our economy for the past decade, as the shale energy revolution has made the U.S. the world's energy superpower. We can do much more.
But should we? To answer that, we have to reject the false alternative of "climate change believer" or "climate change denier" and become "climate thinkers" -- people who think carefully about the magnitude of man-made warming and compare it with the unique benefits of fossil fuels.
Candidates who are climate thinkers will conclude that man-made warming is mild and manageable, not runaway and catastrophic. And thus they will conclude that fossil fuels should be liberated, not restricted.
Alex Epstein, author of The Moral Case for Fossil Fuels, is president and founder of the Center for Industrial Progress, a for-profit think tank that has clients in the fossil fuel industry. 



Arctic sea ice is slipping away  and you're to blame


Think you aren't personally responsible
for climate change?
Think again.
The average American causes
about 600 square feet of Arctic
sea ice to vanish each year, according
to a study released
Thursday, and something as simple
as your summer road trip may
be to blame.
The study, the first to provide
this level of detail about the link
between carbon pollution and
Arctic ice, shows how human carbon
emissions are playing a devastating
role.
The study found that summer
Arctic sea ice will be gone in 30
years  and that means more volatile
weather patterns  unless
carbon emissions are reduced
rapidly.
Sea ice is frozen ocean water
that melts each summer, then refreezes
each winter. Its summertime
area has been shrinking
each year by nearly 34,000 square
miles, according to the National
Snow and Ice Data Center.
The study, which combined observations,
statistics and dozens
of computer models, appeared in
the journal Science. A lack of Arctic
sea has been linked to the ongoing
drought in California and
some of the recent massive snowstorms
along the East Coast, said
study lead author Dirk Notz of
the Max Planck Institute for Meteorology
in Germany.
For each ton of carbon dioxide
that a person emits anywhere on
Earth, 32 square feet of Arctic
summer sea ice disappears, Notz
said. That's equal to one roundtrip
flight from New York to
Europe, or a 2,500-mile car ride.
Carbon dioxide, the greenhouse
gas most responsible for
man-made climate change, is
emitted from the burning of fossil
fuels such as gas, oil and coal.
The average American emits
about 20 tons of carbon dioxide
per year, which translates into
about 600 square feet of Arctic
summer sea ice melting away, the
study said. The rapid retreat of
sea ice is one of the most direct
signs of climate change on our
planet, according to the study.
"The article confirms some of
my worst fears," said Penn State
meteorologist Michael Mann,
who was not involved in the
study. 



Trump has climate summit sweating; Global warming skeptic promised to revamp pact


Environmental advocates who came to promote efforts to combat global warming worry that the election of Donald Trump, who once called climate change a "hoax," will unravel their progress.
Less than a year ago, the United States and nearly 200 other countries adopted the world's first global climate pact, called the Paris Agreement.
Trump has vowed to renegotiate the deal, which limits greenhouse gas emissions.
Negotiators and observers attending the Marrakech Climate Change Conference  said the momentum established last year in Paris would continue and expressed hope that as president, Trump would change tack and pursue efforts to confront climate change.
"We've got a new administration and a new opportunity to surge forward on climate action," said Mariana Panuncio-Feldman, a senior director for the World Wildlife Fund.
Others were less optimistic.
"Donald Trump has the unflattering distinction of being the only head of state in the entire world to reject the scientific consensus that humans are driving climate change," said Michael Brune, the Sierra Club's executive director. 



Gates starts $1B fund to fight climate change

Billionaire philanthropist  Bill Gates is forming a new fund with more than $1billion to invest in technologies aimed at counteracting climate change. The Breakthrough Energy Ventures fund "will finance emerging energy breakthroughs that can deliver affordable and reliable zero carbon emissions."
American Express expanding parental leave
American Express will widen its parental leave program to offer paid maternal or paternal leave for up to 20 weeks. Mothers who  need additional medical leave will  be able to take another 6-8 weeks before returning to work.
Ells is Chipotle'S SOle CEO
Steve Ells, who founded Chipotle Mexican Grill in 1993, will again become CEO of the burrito chain. Since 2009, Ells shared co-CEO duties with Monty Moran, who  has stepped down as co-CEO and vacated his seat on Chipotle's board, the company said. 



Cabinet shaping up to be most conservative in decades; Nominees leading charge to dismantle Obama initiatives


Donald Trump ran for the White House as an outsider and a pragmatist. But he's quickly putting together an administration that will be the most fiercely conservative of any in decades.
After campaigning as the least ideological presidential contender in modern times, Trump is naming a Cabinet and senior White House staff that is dominated by retired military leaders, wealthy business executives and partisan activists who oppose the historic mission of the departments they are poised to head. While the president-elect issued few policy blueprints while he was seeking the job, his nominees for key posts already have been leading the charge to dismantle President Obama's initiatives on health care and climate change.
"I call it the three 'G' Cabinet: Goldman, generals and gazillionaires," Missouri Sen. Claire McCaskill, a Democrat, said mockingly Sunday on ABC's This Week, a reference to multiple Trump appointees who have worked at the Wall Street firm Goldman Sachs.
On Fox News Sunday, Trump said he was "very, very close" to naming his pick for the Cabinet's biggest prize, secretary of State, speaking favorably of ExxonMobil CEO Rex Tillerson. "He's much more than a business executive," Trump said of Tillerson, reported to be the frontrunner for the job. "I mean, he's a world-class player." The president-elect also favorably mentioned two other prospects, 2012 presidential nominee Mitt Romney and Senate Foreign Relations chairman Bob Corker.
Trump's unorthodox campaign, dominated by a promise to "make America great again" and attacks on Democratic opponent Hillary Clinton, gave limited  insights about what a Trump administration would look like. But in the past four weeks, he has reassured Republicans and alarmed Democrats by appointments that largely reflect GOP orthodoxy -- from a Labor secretary-designate who opposes raising the minimum wage to a Housing and Urban Development secretary-designate who warns that subsidized housing fosters dependency.
His domestic team would have been a good fit for just about any of his Republican primary rivals, though Trump's friendly stance toward Russia and its provocative president, Vladimir Putin, is at odds with GOP tradition and the party's leading congressional voices on foreign policy.
So far, Trump's choices -- including top jobs for a trio of veterans of Goldman Sachs, a firm he blasted at campaign rallies -- haven't reflected the populist impulses that fueled his appeal to some white working-class voters or his vow to "drain the swamp" in Washington of donors and other insiders.
"I think we're going to have one of the great Cabinets ever put together," Trump boasted. The nominations, announced via Twitter and at campaign-style rallies, provide clues about how he will operate and what he will do after the Inauguration.
Here are some things we're learning:
'I like generals'
"I think generals are terrific, you know?" Trump said in Sunday's interview on Fox News. "They go through schools and they sort of end up at the top of the pyramid, and it's like a test. They passed the test of life." He's picked three of them to top jobs: retired Marine Corps general James "Mad Dog" Mattis as secretary of Defense, retired Marine Corps general John Kelly as secretary of Homeland Security, and retired Army general Michael Flynn as national security adviser.
He's also met at Trump Tower with retired Army general David Petraeus and retired Navy admiral James Stavridis as he weighed the possibilities for secretary of State.
Corporate command
Not since the Eisenhower administration have so many business executives landed top government jobs, making Trump's Cabinet the wealthiest in American history. "I want people that made a fortune because now they're negotiating with you," he told supporters Thursday in Des Moines during his "thank you" tour. "It's not different than a great baseball player or a great golfer."
He has designated former Goldman Sachs banker Steve Bannon as his senior White House strategist, Goldman veteran Steve Mnuchin as Treasury secretary, billionaire investor Wilbur Ross as Commerce secretary and billionaire activist Betsy DeVos as Education secretary. Another billionaire, Chicago Cubs co-owner Todd Ricketts, has been named deputy Commerce secretary.
Linda McMahon, a former CEO of World Wrestling Entertainment, has been chosen to head the Small Business Administration. A millionaire who is married to a billionaire, she contributed $7 million to pro-Trump super PACs this fall.
Climate-change campaign in the crosshairs
Last week, environmental activists were encouraged when Trump met with former vice president Al Gore and actor Leonardo DiCaprio, both activists on climate change. Then the president-elect selected as head of the Environmental Protection Agency Oklahoma attorney general Scott Pruitt -- a skeptic of climate change who repeatedly has sued the EPA to push back regulations aimed at reducing emissions from coal-fired power plants.
Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, R-Wash., an ally of the fossil-fuel industry, is reported to be Trump's choice to lead the Interior Department. She has supported legislation to open the Atlantic Ocean to drilling and prevent the Interior Department from regulating hydraulic fracturing.
Russian roulette
Trump's stance on Russia, including his call for more cooperation with Putin, puts him at odds with many of the Republicans allied with him on other fronts. Some of the top appointments he has made or is considering are aligned with his views. Flynn sat next to Putin last year during a paid appearance in Moscow for Russia Today, a TV network financed by the Kremlin. Tillerson, who has negotiated business deals with Putin for years, was awarded Russia's Order of Friendship in 2013.
Trump disputed the conclusion in an unpublished CIA report that Russia tried to intervene in the election to boost his prospects. "I think it's ridiculous," he said. "I don't believe it." 



The new White House warms to climate skeptics

During the campaign, Donald Trump described human-caused climate change as a scam and a hoax, and he vowed to take the United States out of the Paris accord, a global effort to curb greenhouse gas emissions and the warming they cause.
Since the election, the president-elect has changed his tune, telling Fox News Sunday that he is "open-minded" about the Paris agreement, and that he had "good meetings" recently with climate activists Al Gore and Leonardo DiCaprio.
Those are encouraging words for the two-thirds of Americans rightfully worried about global warming. But there seems to be a disconnect between those words and Trump's actions in putting forth a slate of climate change skeptics for key administration jobs:
Most troubling among them is Scott Pruitt, Oklahoma attorney general and fossil fuel industry ally, to lead the Environmental Protection Agency. Pruitt has sued the EPA -- unsuccessfully more often than not -- to block federal efforts to limit the poisons flowing from power plants, reduce smog, protect waterways, and cut climate-harmful methane. Sierra Club Executive Director Michael Brune compares putting Pruitt at the EPA to "putting an arsonist in charge of fighting fires."
Trump's architect for EPA transition is Myron Ebell, director of a Washington think tank funded by coal and oil interests and a noted global warming skeptic. Ebell has accused  scientists of "manipulating and falsifying the data" on climate change.
The president-elect's consideration for Interior secretary is Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, R-Wash. A strong opponent of greenhouse gas regulations, she once said that Gore "deserves an 'F' in science and an 'A' in creative writing." If approved as Interior secretary, Rodgers would oversee energy policy on a half-a-billion acres of public land.
The leading contender for secretary of State is Rex Tillerson, chief executive of energy giant ExxonMobil. Tillerson, to his credit, acknowledges that climate change is a threat and supports a carbon tax. But given his background, it's hard to imagine Tillerson promoting a transition away from fossil fuels.
Thomas Pyle, a former Koch Industries lobbyist who is handling the transition at the Energy Department, authored a wish list for rolling back Obama administration climate initiatives: pulling out of the Paris accord; increasing energy production on federal lands; canceling President Obama's Clean Power Plan; and scaling back vehicle emission standards.
U.S. leadership on climate issues is vital because America is second only to China in emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases. More than 190 countries signed the Paris accord, and if Trump pulls the U.S. out, other nations discouraged by America's action might leave as well, vastly increasing the odds of highly dangerous warming with rising seas, growing drought and severe weather.
On climate change issues, it's important to watch not just what Trump says, but also what he and his appointees do. Nothing less than the future of the planet could depend on it. 



Regardless of Trump's stance, companies curbing emissions; Mars candy maker among those standing by Paris climate accord


Just where Donald Trump stands on climate change seems more uncertain than ever now that he's acknowledged to The New York Times that he sees "some connectivity" between human activity and increasing global temperatures.
Trump's remarks last week followed his disregard of climate change during his election campaign, including his pledge to pull the U.S. out of a 2015 agreement with nearly 200 other nations to keep temperatures from rising to catastrophic levels.
As for that accord struck in Paris last December, Trump now says he's keeping "an open mind to it," according to the Times, whose publisher and editorial staff met with the president-elect at the newspaper's headquarters in New York.
But while only time will tell whether the U.S. government will remain a leader in confronting climate change during the Trump administration, corporations here and around the world are making clear their determination to curb their emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases that most climate scientists blame for global warming.
"I think you are going to see the corporate sector stepping up," Barry Parkin, the chief sustainability officer for Mars, one of the world's leading food companies, told me recently. "More and more, companies are driving this forward, irrespective of what governments choose to do."
The name over familiar candy brands -- M&Ms, Snickers, Twix and Skittles among them -- Mars also owns other well-known items  such as Uncle Ben's and Wrigley's gum.
From Nov. 7-18, Mars and more than 360 companies large and small reaffirmed their commitment to the Paris accord during a round of international climate negotiations in Marrakech, Morocco, urging President Obama, Trump and other global leaders to stick with the agreement, as well. "Climate change is a world issue and a long-term challenge," Parkin said by phone from Marrakech, where he was attending the climate talks. "To put it in Mars terms, we produce in 140 factories in more than 40 countries. So, for us to meet our commitments to zero greenhouse-gas operations, we have to act in 40 countries."
Mars' pledges include an ambitious one of eliminating its greenhouse-gas emissions by 2040, which means steadily reducing its reliance on fossil fuels at its facilities in the U.S. and elsewhere while continuing to build its business.
So far, the McLean, Va.-based company is largely keeping pace with its climate agenda, having met a target of cutting GHG emissions by 25% as of 2015 compared to 2007 levels, though it fell short of its goal of reducing its fossil-fuel use by the same percentage. Still, the company managed to check its reliance on fossil fuels by 18%.
Contributing substantially to that initiative is Mars' wind-energy farm in Mesquite Creek, Texas, a 200-megawatt, 118-turbine facility that produces electricity equivalent to 100% of the company's power needs in the U.S.
Similar wind projects are underway in the United Kingdom and Mexico to match Mars' energy requirements in those two countries.
"The reality is renewable energy is now cheaper in many parts of the world than fossil fuels," said Parkin, whose privately held company's openness on sustainability contrasts with its legendary secrecy on most other business matters.
Mars is among the founding members of an international organization called RE100, which encourages major companies to commit to using 100% renewable power. The 2-year-old group includes 83 companies, among them Bank of America, Coca-Cola, General Motors, Hewlett Packard, IKEA and Johnson & Johnson.
Parkin predicts that "hundreds more" will join RE100 over the next year or so.
As for Trump's climate agenda, Parkin, like others, says he has "no idea" what lies in store.
But of this he's certain: "Administrations come and administrations go, and the problems and the solutions will outlast them."
Loveless is a veteran energy journalist and podcast host in Washington. 



The end of the world as we know it; Incorporated' is the latest foray into the apocalypse


You think it's bad now? Just wait.
Syfy's Incorporated (Wednesday, 10 ET/PT, with pilot  on Syfy's YouTube channel) is the latest entertainment offering set in an  authoritarian future, this time with  corporations taking over  failed governments in a planet decaying  from climate change.
It's "the dystopian world that I see ourselves moving toward rapidly. To be able to take on the challenge of living in that world and trying to explore that world is very intriguing to me," says Dennis Haysbert (24, The Unit), who plays Julian, the intimidating enforcer for Spiga Biotech, one of the global giants.
Incorporated, set in 2074, centers on rising executive Ben Larson (Sean Teale, Reign), who advises Spiga boss (Julia Ormond, Mad Men, Sabrina) -- she's also his mother-in-law -- even as he infiltrates the organization on behalf of an opposition group.
Incorporated, produced by Ben Affleck and Matt Damon, is just onerecent TV show or film that explores an authoritarian, post-apocalyptic or environmentally degraded world. Others: Mr. Robot, The Walking Dead, Divergent, Elysium and Snowpiercer, with The Handmaid's Tale coming to Hulu in 2017.
Haysbert expects more will come, as entertainment reflects cultural anxieties.
"There's going to be a deluge of post-apocalyptic, dystopian films coming out, because we are headed toward that," he says. "It's always prudent to show you what the extreme negative can be so we can really try to push forward the positive in our real lives."
Incorporated, which was screened at the United Nations, connects to a long dystopian tradition that can be traced back decades to films such  as Fritz Lang's Metropolis in 1927. It shares themes with many novels, films and TV shows, including:
Corporatism. In Incorporated, companies such as Spiga protect and provide for employees in a dangerous, ecologically diminished world while demanding  loyalty. (Similar themes explored in: The Fifth Element; Wall-E, Metropolis; Blade Runner.)
Climate change/Environmental destruction. Global warming and pollution have wreaked havoc on Incorporated's Earth, with Iceland as a beach destination, a melted Arctic ice cap and limited food  under tight corporate control. (Snowpiercer, The 100, The Day After Tomorrow, Waterworld, A Boy and His Dog and Soylent Green.)
Surveillance society. Spiga employees undergo electronic body scans upon arrival and departure from work and Julian asks Ben about a program that allows the Big Brother-like examination of people's dreams. (1984, Mr. Robot, Person of Interest.)
Reproduction/Fertility/Eugenics. Ben's wife, Laura (Allison Miller, Terra Nova), needs corporate approval to become pregnant. (Children of Men, The Handmaid's Tale, Gattaca, THX 1138, The Lottery, Orphan Black.)
Class division/Wealth inequality. Ben and Laura live and work in an  affluent, clean-bordering-on-sterile Green Zone, with  walls and  security protecting it from the dangerous, decayed Red Zone. (Brave New World, Elysium, Metropolis, Dark Angel.)
Decayed, forbidding urban environment. For  fun, Ben and his  colleagues head to the lawless Red Zone, a grimy, neon-lit place with entertainment involving sex, drugs and violence. (Blade Runner, A Clockwork Orange.)
Human trafficking.  Ben is searching for a woman he knew in his youth who may now be a sex slave available for the enjoyment of corporate overlords. (Dollhouse, Westworld.) 



Electric vehicles could face new field; Trump White House could drive them into uncertainty


The Chevrolet Bolt EV, Tesla Model 3 and electric vehicles in general face a radically new regulatory and political playing field as a professed climate change skeptic prepares to occupy the White House.
The budding Trump administration so far has been short on policy specifics. But just two days after the election, automakers' chief lobbying group, the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers, urged the Trump transition team to revise not only the fuel economy standards, but also the Obama administration's autonomous vehicle standards, on the grounds that they could cost its member companies billions of dollars.
"The short answer is that we don't know what will happen with the Trump administration and electric vehicles," said Dave Reichmuth, senior engineer for the Union of Concerned Scientists clean vehicles program. "It might be awhile before we understand the policy priorities for the new administration."
Reichmuth points out that the EV tax credit is embedded in the larger federal tax code, so removing it would require action from Congress. So it's not likely to be changed soon, even if that was the direction that was chosen.
It's worth noting that many of the cars receiving the credit come from U.S. assembly lines -- Tesla in Fremont, Calif., the Volt and Bolt in the Detroit area  and the Nissan Leaf in Smyrna, Tenn. None of this will shake automakers' resolve to advertise and sell these plug-in vehicles.
The Bolt EV comes off a week when it won two Car of the Year awards, one from Motor Trend, the second from Green Car Journal. Its certified 238-mile range on a full charge should ease consumers' anxiety about being stranded.
The Bolt comes to market, beginning in California, at least one year ahead of the Tesla Model 3. Both are in the same price range -- about $30,000 or slightly less after the $7,500 federal tax credit.
"We have six now, and four are already sold. Mid-December is the target week for when we get any more," said Brian Satterlund, new car sales manager at Ron Tonkin Chevrolet in Portland, Ore., which has more public charging stations per capita than any U.S. city.
About 1,100 miles south in Redwood City, Calif., about 40 customers have preordered Bolts, according to Michael Little, a sales consultant at Boardwalk Chevrolet.
"Those people have paid a $1,000 deposit that holds your place in line," Little said. "We're expecting to receive 39 Bolts the week of Nov. 28 and another 14 on Dec. 12."
Despite the turmoil in Washington, D.C., the West Coast remains a strong market for EVs.
California alone accounted for 54.5%, or 62,119, of the plug-in electric vehicles sold in 2015, according to hybridcars.com.
The nation's largest state also has its own EV tax credits -- $2,500 for battery electrics and $1,500 for plug-in hybrids.
Dan Sperling, founding director of the University of California-Davis Institute for Transportation Studies, said the industry's letter to the Trump transition team should not be interpreted as a plea to drop emission or fuel economy standards altogether.
These are global companies, and China and Europe are moving forward with their incentives for non-gas-burning vehicles. Whatever the Trump administration does, the rest of the world won't abandon the Paris Agreement to reduce the global growth of carbon emissions.
"The industry has made a massive investment in electric vehicles," Sperling said. "While some would prefer to slow it down, most companies are going to continue along that path." 



Coal's decline may continue under Trump administration; Cheap shale gas has become major force in energy markets


During his campaign for the White House, President-elect Donald Trump promised to eliminate regulations that target coal-fired power plants, one of the primary causes of carbon emissions responsible for climate change.
For Trump, a climate-change skeptic, getting rid of the Obama administration's Clean Power Plan, which would curb carbon emissions from power plants by 32% by 2030, would give a boost to the declining U.S. coal industry and its decimated workforce across Appalachia.
Even if the next president were to succeed, he would probably not reverse a years-long movement away from coal in the U.S. electric power industry, the biggest consumer of the black rock, according to the head of one of the nation's leading electric utilities.
"If he were able to do that, I don't know really how much impact it would have because we're moving ahead and rebalancing our portfolio," Nick Akins, the president and CEO of American Electric Power, said recently.
"I think it's going to be very difficult for new coal-fired generation to get developed," he said.
Obama-era policies requiring reductions in emissions of carbon, mercury and other pollutants have contributed to coal's loss of market share in the power sector.
Even more significant has been record U.S. production of cheap shale gas, thanks to hydraulic fracturing and other technologies, plus the slow but steady penetration of wind and solar energy into power markets.
"It's a seven-year construction cycle for a coal unit; 15 years for a nuclear unit," Akins said in a phone call from AEP's Columbus, Ohio, headquarters. "You can develop a natural gas plant in two to three years, with a lot less risk for shareholders, and the price of natural gas as a fuel source is still substantially low.
"And there are areas of the country that benefit from low-cost renewable fuels, particularly wind, and solar continues to come down as well, particularly utility-scale solar. Those are areas that will continue to develop."
For AEP, which has 5.4 million customers in 11 states, coal's share of the company's generating capacity has fallen from 71% in 2005 to about 47% in 2017. Over that time, gas capacity has risen from 20% to 27%, and renewable energy has jumped from 3% to 13%.
The switch is happening even faster across the USA, where gas surpasses coal as a fuel for power plants.
All told, the U.S. Energy Information Administration expects gas to provide an average of 34% of the electricity generated in the USA in 2016, compared with 30% for coal.
Also figuring heavily in utility investment decisions are changing expectations among customers, especially demands for "clean energy" among younger customers.
"There's no doubt that there's an element of environmental stewardship that continues to be part of the fabric of our investment thesis," Akins said.
Trump's bid to reverse Obama environmental policies may provide a reprieve for some older coal power plants, though gas prices, if they remain low, will probably cut into those units' operating time, according to the utility chief.
At the same time, Trump's bullish support for gas production and pipeline construction may exacerbate coal's competitive problems.
"We'll still have the capacity available, but we won't be using the units as much, and you'll see more utilization of natural gas to back up intermittent renewable energy," Akins said.
Trump's commitment to promote new infrastructure may benefit companies such as AEP, whose 40,000-mile electric transmission network is the largest in the USA.
AEP spends more than $3 billion a year on transmission improvements, including projects designed to bring new renewable and distributed energy to market.
"There's no question that jobs are being created on the infrastructure side of things," he said.
As for communities where AEP has shuttered coal power plants, the company works with economic-development officials in states such as Kentucky and West Virginia to see whether the sites can be marketed for new manufacturing.
"If the Trump administration really wants to focus on that part of the country, it really ought to think of them like the Go Zones in Louisiana after Hurricane Katrina," Akins said, referring to a law passed by Congress in 2005 that provided tax incentives for businesses locating in areas in three states devastated by Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. 
