Difficult to grade a poliarizing president





LETTERS
President Obama will go down in history as a significant and transformative president, whom we will look back upon favorably decades into the future. From increasing access to health care, to increasing rights of the disaffected, to combating climate change, President Obama was on the right side of the issues. He will be seen as a once-in-a-generation leader who will be sorely missed.
Thanks, Obama!
Steven Clayton
Ocean, N.J.
FACEBOOK
Donald Trump emerged when President Obama disenfranchised a large swath of American citizens over eight years and when Hillary Clinton was crowned as the Democratic nominee. Granted, Trump is a deeply flawed individual, but he was the lesser of two evils.
Anthony Cieszkiewicz
In some ways, Obama being president was a good thing. His disastrous failure has finally woken up much of America, and they've had enough of elite politicians. President Trump is going to do great things for America.
Dwayne Landry
The legacy of the worst president ever is a broken Democratic Party, a bloated federal government, a decimated militia, a racially divided nation, the largest federal debt our nation has ever held and almost half of the workforce without meaningful jobs.
Tr Hardenbergh
It's amazing how Obama thinks we are better off after eight years of nothing. No hope, no change for the better. The world no longer respects the greatest country, and that is because of him.
Mario Luna
Somehow this president had his party lose the Senate, the House and several governorships, despite having a majority when he was elected.
Ernie Ziroll
TWITTER
We asked our followers their thoughts on President Obama's farewell speech on Tuesday.
It just reinforced the fact that we are going from the best to an absolute nightmare.
@thechairqueen
Loved it! Never agreed with all of his policies, but I love his commitment. I agree with the message of getting involved.
@Limbaugh2016
I will miss the Obamas so much!
@untameheart2
I loved it. It was inspiring, powerful and a reminder that we're losing a great man as president. Donald Trump could learn from Obama.
@BLACKGRLPOLI
For more, follow @USATOpinion or #tellusatoday. 



Trump's EPA pick splits on climate; Pruitt says change is no hoax, but he leaves room for debate





President-elect Donald Trump's nominee to head the Environmental Protection Agency said Wednesday that he does not agree with Trump that climate change is a hoax, but he stopped short of saying that human activity is the main culprit or that the United States must reduce its use of fossil fuels.
Scott Pruitt, who has sued the EPA 14 times as Oklahoma attorney general, said he believes climate change is real, despite comments from Trump over the years -- including during his presidential campaign -- that climate change was a hoax perpetuated by the Chinese to reduce the competitiveness of U.S. manufacturers.
"I do not believe that climate change is a hoax," Pruitt said in response to questions from Sen. Ed Markey, D-Mass., during his confirmation hearing before the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee.
When pressed by Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., Pruitt would not say human activity is the primary cause of climate change. Most scientists say the burning of oil, gas and coal to generate power is the main factor creating climate change. Oil and natural gas are major industries in Oklahoma.
"Science tells us the climate is changing and human activity in some matter impacts that change," Pruitt said. "The ability to measure and pursue the degree and the extent of that impact and what to do about it are subject to continuing debate and dialogue."
When Sanders asked Pruitt whether he believes the United States must transform its energy system away from fossil fuels to protect future generations from climate change, Pruitt said, "I believe the EPA has a very important role in regulating the (carbon) emissions."
Pruitt said he believes the EPA has a vital role to play in protecting public health and the environment. During the presidential campaign, Trump called the EPA's work "a disgrace."
"I believe there is a very important role for the Environmental Protection Agency," Pruitt said.
Sen. Tom Carper of Delaware, the senior Democrat on the committee, questioned what kind of environmental steward Pruitt would be when the president-elect has attacked the EPA and talked about wanting to get rid of part of the agency.
Pruitt said the EPA is crucial in enforcing clean air and water laws across state lines.
Democrats challenged his ties to polluting industries, his skepticism about the man-made causes of climate change and the frequent lawsuits he has filed to block the EPA's clean air and water rules.
Sen. Tammy Duckworth, D-Ill., questioned whether Pruitt was giving senators vague, pleasant answers on controversial issues to get through his confirmation hearing.
She said there was a contrast between Pruitt's comments as Oklahoma attorney general criticizing the federal renewable fuel standard and his promise during Wednesday's hearing to carry out that mandate. The renewable fuel standard requires gasoline used by cars and other vehicles to contain a certain amount of renewable fuels.
"Are you that Mr. Pruitt (who criticized the standard) or the Scott Pruitt today who is saying all the right things at his confirmation hearing?" Duckworth asked.
The agency was created in 1970 by President Richard Nixon to protect human health and the environment.
Pruitt joined a coalition of state attorneys general to sue the EPA over its Clean Power Plan, which aims to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions from coal-fired power plants that contribute to climate change. He sued the agency over regulations to reduce methane emissions -- also linked to climate change -- from the oil and gas industry.
"Not a single American voted for dirtier air and drinking water, but if Mr. Pruitt takes the helm at the EPA, that's what millions of Americans and thousands of communities will face," said Ken Cook, co-founder and president of the Environmental Working Group. "Every senator, regardless of party, should reject this nomination on behalf of their constituents' health."
Pruitt's supporters said he will help rein in an agency that has hurt farmers, ranchers and small businesses and the overall U.S. economy with burdensome and costly regulations.
Nearly 40 livestock associations signed a letter to Environment and Public Works Chairman John Barrasso, R-Wyo., and Carper urging Pruitt's confirmation. 



Gore's sequel is right on time for the Trump era; Former VP is back with another take on climate chang





The 33rd annual Sundance Film Festival got off to an appropriately political start.
Hours after founder Robert Redford defended artists in the Donald Trump era at an opening-day  news conference, former vice president Al Gore acknowledged the president in his topical An Inconvenient Sequel: Truth to Power, which premiered at the fest Thursday.
Directed by Bonni Cohen and Jon Shenk, Sequel (which Paramount will release in theaters July 28) surveys the alarming effects of climate change in the decade since Gore's Academy Award-winning 2006 documentary, An Inconvenient Truth.
The 99-minute film is centered on Gore as he travels around the country giving presentations in his "climate leadership training" sessions: spouting off troubling statistics of air pollution levels and polar ice caps melting but also more encouraging, upward trends in solar and renewable energy worldwide.
Audience members wiped  away tears during emotional interviews with survivors of the Philippines' Typhoon Haiyan in 2013 and later when Gore traveled to Paris for a global conference on climate change just weeks after terrorist attacks rocked the city in November 2015.
But scenes involving Trump elicited the most passionate responses from the crowd -- some of whom shook their heads and muttered profanities during TV clips of Trump calling global-warming fears "insane" and a "low problem" on the nation's agenda. The film ends with Gore reading news of Trump's victory the day after the election: at first seemingly frustrated but later hopeful as he walks into a meeting at Trump Tower in New York.
Despite worries that Trump will seek to cut climate and energy funding, Gore stuck to his encouraging message as he addressed festival-goers at the Eccles Theatre.
"Over the years, there have been a lot of people who have started out as deniers and have changed over time. Whether he will or not remains to be seen," Gore said. He  said global warming is "not a political issue; it's a moral issue, it's an ethical issue. ... We have the capacity to rise above our limitations. Whether or not Donald Trump will take the kind of approach that continues this progress, we'll have to see. But let me reiterate: No one person can stop this. It's too big now."
Reviews have been positive for Sequel, whose premiere the night before Trump's inauguration many critics found apt and even beneficial.
"If Hillary Clinton were about to be inaugurated as president, then An Inconvenient Sequel would still be highly worth seeing," wrote Variety's Owen Gleiberman. "But the movie ... has now been given the kind of shot in the arm that only a seething enemy can provide."
Indiewire's Eric Kohn said Gore "hits an inspiring note at a moment when it's in short supply," even if another sequel may be needed sooner rather than later. 



CRITIC'S CORNER





American Experience: Rachel Carson PBS, 8 ET/PT
As debate rages over the proper response to climate change, American Experience profiles Rachel Carson, who helped give birth to the modern American environmental movement. A scientist and writer, Carson's best-selling 1962 book, Silent Spring, awakened the nation to the damage being done to wildlife by pesticides -- and to the impact our actions were having on the environment in general.
DC's Legends of Tomorrow CW, 9 ET/PT
This struggling (but already renewed) superhero show moves to a new day and time with an outing that sends the Legends back to 1967 to rescue their former leader, Rip (Arthur Darvill). While the story eventually works itself around to a clever salute to the power of art, the episode as a whole may still leave you wishing the show itself  were more artful. There are some fine TV performers here, Neal McDonough, John Barrowman, Brandon Routh, Dominic Purcell and Victor Garber chief among them. But their work tends to get lost among the less riveting performances and the routine action sequences that surround them. This is one show where less, and fewer, might be more.
This Is Us NBC, 9 ET/PT
The season's biggest, and most pleasant, surprise offers what
the producers promise is a "big episode." Sounds like an hour fans won't want to miss -- not that they would, anyway. 



Despite Tillerson's support, slim chance for carbon tax





With the Trump administration poised to reverse U.S. policies on climate change, the head of a major oil and natural gas company is calling again for governments around the world to put a price on carbon emissions once and for all.
BP CEO Bob Dudley reiterated his company's longstanding position in releasing its annual report on global energy trends.
"In BP, we continue to believe that carbon pricing has an important part to play as it provides incentives for everyone -- producers and consumers alike -- to play their part," Dudley said at a news conference in London last week.
The "BP Energy Outlook 2035" offers some good news regarding carbon emissions, projecting annual growth of 0.6% per year from 2015 to 2035, compared to 2.1% per year over the last two decades. Give credit to gains in renewable energy, natural gas and energy efficiency for that improvement.
But the report goes on to say that even at that lower annual growth rate, total carbon emissions from energy use are likely to increase by 13% from 2015 to 2035, a stark contrast with the 30% reduction in emissions that the International Energy Agency suggests is necessary to meet goals set in the 2015 Paris climate agreement.
"That," according to Dudley, "flags up the need for further policy action."
As a matter of policy, BP doesn't express a preference between the two leading options for pricing emissions: a carbon tax, versions of which have been adopted in Australia, Ireland, Sweden and other countries, or a cap-and-trade program, which China says it will apply to electric power and other industries.
"Our view is that putting a price on carbon will reduce emissions at a larger scale and at a lower cost than alternative policy measures, by reducing the demand for carbon-intensive products," BP says on its website.
"We consider that this is fair -- as long as the carbon price impacts all (greenhouse-gas) emitters equally -- and we are keen to compete on this level playing field," the company adds.
The message is a familiar one for BP and  major oil companies -- among them ExxonMobil, Royal Dutch Shell and the Norwegian company Statoil -- who favor carbon pricing as a means of addressing climate change.
ExxonMobil, the U.S.-based oil giant whose acknowledgement of climate change has been called late and lacking by some states and environmentalists, says a carbon tax is "the most efficient means of reflecting the cost of carbon in all economic decisions."
In fact, former ExxonMobil CEO Rex Tillerson, President Trump's choice for U.S. secretary of State, acknowledged at his recent Senate confirmation hearing that a carbon tax could replace "the hodgepodge of approaches" by federal and state governments to reduce emissions.
Tillerson's remarks at the Jan. 11 hearing brought to mind a speech he gave in 2009, when he began to promote the idea of a "revenue-neutral" carbon tax, with the proceeds returned to taxpayers through reductions in other levies.
Such a fee, he told The Economic Club in Washington, "can be predictable, transparent, and comparatively simple to understand and implement."
"As a businessman, I have to take a deep breath every time I speak about this, because it's hard for me to speak favorably about any new tax," Tillerson admitted. "I hope you see it shows how serious we are about this issue."
But enacting a carbon price remains as unlikely as ever in Washington, where Trump is considering reversing the Obama administration's commitment to the 2015 Paris climate agreement and most Republican lawmakers have signed a pledge to oppose tax increases.
That sentiment was evident last week at an American Enterprise Institute seminar examining the pros and cons of a carbon tax, where AEI and Heritage Foundation analysts disputed the widespread view of scientists that human-induced global warming puts the world at risk of an environmental catastrophe.
David Kreutzer, a senior research fellow in energy economics and climate change at the Heritage Foundation, an influential think tank for the Trump administration, called a carbon tax "a costly non-solution to an unlikely problem." 



Despite Tillerson's support, slim chance for carbon tax





With the Trump administration poised to reverse U.S. policies on climate change, the head of a major oil and natural gas company is calling again for governments around the world to put a price on carbon emissions once and for all.
BP CEO Bob Dudley reiterated his company's longstanding position in releasing its annual report on global energy trends.
"In BP, we continue to believe that carbon pricing has an important part to play as it provides incentives for everyone -- producers and consumers alike -- to play their part," Dudley said at a news conference in London last week.
The "BP Energy Outlook 2035" offers some good news regarding carbon emissions, projecting annual growth of 0.6% per year from 2015 to 2035, compared to 2.1% per year over the last two decades. Give credit to gains in renewable energy, natural gas and energy efficiency for that improvement.
But the report goes on to say that even at that lower annual growth rate, total carbon emissions from energy use are likely to increase by 13% from 2015 to 2035, a stark contrast with the 30% reduction in emissions that the International Energy Agency suggests is necessary to meet goals set in the 2015 Paris climate agreement.
"That," according to Dudley, "flags up the need for further policy action."
As a matter of policy, BP doesn't express a preference between the two leading options for pricing emissions: a carbon tax, versions of which have been adopted in Australia, Ireland, Sweden and other countries, or a cap-and-trade program, which China says it will apply to electric power and other industries.
"Our view is that putting a price on carbon will reduce emissions at a larger scale and at a lower cost than alternative policy measures, by reducing the demand for carbon-intensive products," BP says on its website.
"We consider that this is fair -- as long as the carbon price impacts all (greenhouse-gas) emitters equally -- and we are keen to compete on this level playing field," the company adds.
The message is a familiar one for BP and  major oil companies -- among them ExxonMobil, Royal Dutch Shell and the Norwegian company Statoil -- who favor carbon pricing as a means of addressing climate change.
ExxonMobil, the U.S.-based oil giant whose acknowledgement of climate change has been called late and lacking by some states and environmentalists, says a carbon tax is "the most efficient means of reflecting the cost of carbon in all economic decisions."
In fact, former ExxonMobil CEO Rex Tillerson, President Trump's choice for U.S. secretary of State, acknowledged at his recent Senate confirmation hearing that a carbon tax could replace "the hodgepodge of approaches" by federal and state governments to reduce emissions.
Tillerson's remarks at the Jan. 11 hearing brought to mind a speech he gave in 2009, when he began to promote the idea of a "revenue-neutral" carbon tax, with the proceeds returned to taxpayers through reductions in other levies.
Such a fee, he told The Economic Club in Washington, "can be predictable, transparent, and comparatively simple to understand and implement."
"As a businessman, I have to take a deep breath every time I speak about this, because it's hard for me to speak favorably about any new tax," Tillerson admitted. "I hope you see it shows how serious we are about this issue."
But enacting a carbon price remains as unlikely as ever in Washington, where Trump is considering reversing the Obama administration's commitment to the 2015 Paris climate agreement and most Republican lawmakers have signed a pledge to oppose tax increases.
That sentiment was evident last week at an American Enterprise Institute seminar examining the pros and cons of a carbon tax, where AEI and Heritage Foundation analysts disputed the widespread view of scientists that human-induced global warming puts the world at risk of an environmental catastrophe.
David Kreutzer, a senior research fellow in energy economics and climate change at the Heritage Foundation, an influential think tank for the Trump administration, called a carbon tax "a costly non-solution to an unlikely problem." 



Protect the environment, reject Pruitt's nominatio




Much of the debate over human-caused climate change has been focused on whether the threat has been overestimated. But what if the threat has been underestimated?
Scientists are constantly being surprised by how quickly the planet is changing. Last year was the warmest since modern record-keeping began. Rising temperatures contributed to killer heat waves in Asia and the Middle East, a supersize wildfire in Canada, the retreat of glaciers across the globe and the vast bleaching of the Great Barrier Reef off Australia.
The world's largest iceberg -- the size of Delaware -- is preparing to break off from the Larsen C Ice Shelf in Antarctica. Climatologists say the Arctic could be ice-free in summer within a decade or two. Scientists now believe that, under the worst scenario, oceans could rise 8 feet or more by century's end, inundating coastal cities.
In a bid to stave off catastrophe, nearly 200 nations last year joined the Paris Agreement to curb greenhouse gas emissions. In the United States, the Obama administration mandated cleaner power plants and more fuel-efficient cars.
Much of this progress could be reversed under President Trump, who has expressed skepticism about climate change, has threatened to pull the United States out of the Paris accords, and could jettison Obama's regulations on power plant emissions and gas mileage standards.
Heat-trapping carbon dioxide emissions are regulated by the Environmental Protection Agency, and Trump could not have nominated someone more opposed to the agency's mission than Oklahoma Attorney General Scott Pruitt to be its new administrator.
Pruitt, a champion of the fossil fuel industry, has sued the EPA 14 times to block environmental regulations. In 13 cases, co-plaintiffs included industries that contributed money to Pruitt's political campaign or affiliated committees. During recent confirmation testimony, the nominee declined to say whether, as EPA administrator, he would voluntarily recuse himself from dealing with the lawsuits he filed against the agency.
Pruitt offered a very carefully worded response about climate change. He conceded it was happening. But as to whether the burning of fossil fuels was a primary cause? Debatable, he said. Actually, climate scientists attribute 80% to 90% of recent warming to human causes.
On Thursday, the Senate Environment and Public Works Committeee approved Pruitt's nomination, despite a Democratic boycott, and sent it to the full Senate, where a vote is expected next week.
Elections have consequences and, in most cases, if a nominee is qualified, a new president should be allowed his or her choice. No one should be under the delusion that if Pruitt is turned down, Trump will pick Al Gore to be his EPA chief. But when the future of the planet is on the line, the choice of someone so openly hostile to the EPA's mission is unacceptable. The Senate should send that message to the White House and reject the Pruitt nomination. 



Musk's dance with Trump; Many wonder what he stands to gain from 'weird' bromanc





On Friday, Elon Musk will complete a journey almost as improbable as his vaunted quest for Mars.
In attending President Trump's first business advisory council meeting, the South African-born, self-made billionaire who is bent on saving the world from global warming will have become a counselor to a New York real estate mogul-turned-president who is eager to bring back the age of coal.
The move has many Musk-watchers scratching their heads, given he had not supported candidate Trump.
"Elon has always been very opportunistic," says Ashlee Vance, whose Elon Musk: Tesla, SpaceX and the Quest for a Fantastic Future chronicles the entrepreneur's driven path from Africa to Canada to the U.S. "But still, this is weird."
The opportunities are many, as are the risks.
As chief executive officer of companies that compete in the heavily regulated arenas of aerospace (SpaceX), automotive (Tesla) and energy (SolarCity), Musk, 45, can try to parlay his Trump connection into smoothing regulatory bumps and accessing federal funding as he expands his ventures.
In particular, Musk would appear to be on the brink of bringing sleek electric cars to the masses with his entry-level Model 3 sedan, whose success is key to Tesla becoming profitable and justifying the steep run in its shares. He's hoping to start an alt-energy revolution with a SolarCity acquisition that could find him peddling affordable solar panels and electricity storage devices, an ambition that would benefit from policies such as a carbon tax that penalizes fossil-fuel generation.
Another possible benefit of Musk having ties to the administration would be ground-floor access at the start of any new lunar mission.
Trump, in turn, gets to associate himself with an industry maverick -- a disruptor like the political outsider the president has styled himself -- who is opening factories and expanding U.S.-based jobs. Musk's SolarCity and Tesla efforts are slated to employ tens of thousands in factories on both coasts.
But plenty of pitfalls exist for Musk as he tries to navigate these political waters.
While Trump may personally find himself drawn to a CEO who likes to speak and tweet in declarative statements -- Musk once blasted Apple as a "graveyard" for failed Tesla engineers -- the president is surrounded by powerful counselors who may have the final word.
Last week's seven-nation majority-Muslim immigration ban, which  prompted protests nationwide, was the work of advisers Steve Bannon and Stephen Miller, according to Newsweek. That suggests they or others could steer Trump clear of pro-Tesla or SpaceX decisions should they determine them to be not in the best interests of  Trump's base.
Musk may appeal to Trump's professed love of American ingenuity, but Tesla and SolarCity  have an elitist sheen that could spell disaster. Trump appears to be clearing the way for less regulation in the oil and gas industries, which wouldn't be a boon to an electricity enthusiast.
What's more, if anything happened to today's federal tax incentives on electric cars, Musk could find that his wares cost $7,500 more overnight, no small matter on the $35,000 Model 3.
And another potential pothole looms for Musk, one that's already dinged another tech company in talks with the White House.
In agreeing to broadly advise the new administration -- Musk is on Friday's Strategy and Policy Forum council along with CEOs from Pepsi, General Motors and JP MorganChase, and he's part of a group focused on manufacturing -- there exists the potential brand blowback that Uber experienced this week.
When New York taxis last weekend stopped operating to support protesters at JFK over Trump's Muslim immigration ban, Uber continued to operate. That stand created a backlash on social media named #deleteUber, and competitor Lyft saw its app overtake Uber on the Apple App Store.
Uber CEO Travis Kalanick also came under fire from drivers, who urged him to quit his position on Trump's advisory council. On Thursday afternoon, Kalanick did just that.
Although Tesla stock is up nearly 40% since December, the company did start to see some consumers canceling their $1,000 deposits for the company's upcoming entry-level Model 3 sedan, according to auto site Electrek.
"Kills me as a TSLA fan but need to take a stand," tweeted Colin Niloc, who decided to donate his deposit to charity.
Musk came out against the controversial immigration ban on Twitter in relatively muted language and suggested his 7 million followers use him as a vehicle for change. "Please read immigration order. Lmk (let me know) specific amendments. Will seek advisory council consensus & present to President," he tweeted.
That didn't mollify some tech leaders. Facebook's head of artificial intelligence tweeted at Musk in blunt terms: "You are an advisor to Trump. Quit. If you stay, fight and know that this will hurt your legacy regardless."
In a recent Twitter exchange with Gizmodo, Musk suggested that his decision to engage with the new administration was out of a belief that it would yield better results than a battle.
"The more voices of reason that the President hears, the better," he wrote. "Simply attacking him will achieve nothing. Are you aware of a single case where Trump bowed to protests or media attacks? Better that there are open channels of communication."
Musk biographer Vance says that despite the liberal nature of Tesla's green energy agenda, the boss ultimately knows that reaching his business goals -- whether ridding the planet of carbon monoxide emissions or colonizing Mars -- is integral to that personal legacy.
"Elon is always the underdog, which means he's in self-preservation mode with his companies," says Vance, who notes that despite Musk's outsized personality (another similarity to the 45th president), the success of his companies is by no means guaranteed.
For instance, SolarCity is battling energy companies that are deep-pocketed donors of congressional leaders. In aerospace, SpaceX is fighting the entrenched practice of the U.S. awarding aerospace contracts Lockheed Martin and Boeing partnership.
In his access to Trump and Trump adviser Peter Thiel, who like Musk made a fortune starting PayPal, Musk has a chance to get the new administration on his side. But it's not a given the gambit will win.
Thiel told The New York Times, "They're both grandmaster-level salespeople and these two very much larger-than-life figures." 



To combat global warming, listen to these GOP elders




Maybe it was just a coincidence, but the high temperature in Washington hit a record-shattering 74 degrees on Wednesday, the day a bevy of Republican elder statesmen pitched White House officials on an appealing plan to combat global warming.
The plan for a refundable national carbon tax -- endorsed by James Baker, Henry Paulson, George Shultz and other GOP luminaries -- represents a long overdue, market-based contribution from the right on the climate change issue.
This page has long endorsed the idea of putting a price on carbon dioxide, which traps heat in the atmosphere. Taxing fossil fuels where they enter the economy -- at the refinery, the mining operation or the port -- provides a powerful economic incentive to reduce carbon emissions. A tax is simpler and less intrusive than the Obama administration's heavily regulatory Clean Power Plan, which targets electricity-generating plants.
The tax would boost the chances of clean energy sources becoming more competitive with oil, coal and natural gas. As long as the carbon polluters can use the atmosphere as a free waste dump, renewable sources such as solar and wind will struggle to be economically viable.
Depending on how the tax is structured, it could produce rebates going directly to American consumers to offset higher energy costs. The plan promoted by former secretary of State Baker and his colleagues estimates that an initial tax of $40 on a ton of carbon would generate $2,000 the first year for a family of four.
And there's built-in bipartisan support for the carbon tax idea, which originated with the environmental left. Al Gore likes it, as does Rex Tillerson, Trump's new secretary of State and a former CEO of ExxonMobil. "A carbon dividends program provides a rare exception: a simple idea that strengthens the economy and elevates the economic prospects of the nation's disaffected," the Baker plan says. "Mounting evidence of climate change is growing too strong to ignore."
There would, of course, be devilish details to hammer out. Imports from countries that don't have a carbon tax would have to be taxed; U.S. exports to those nations would have to get a rebate. Environmentalists would want some or all of the revenue generated by the tax to be invested in clean technology research. Republicans say the tax would make environmental lawsuits and tougher regulations against carbon emitters unnecessary, a stance many Democrats would oppose.
The biggest problem is political: getting support from tax-averse Republicans in Congress and a new administration stocked with climate change skeptics. But with evidence mounting by the day of the harmful effects of greenhouse gases accumulating in the atmosphere, the Baker plan represents a significant Republican-led effort to address climate change, one that's more than a lot of hot air. 



Pay now to fight global warming, or pay more later





LETTERS
I commend USA TODAY for the editorial "A serious Republican idea on climate change," on the new conservative proposal to cut greenhouse gas emissions by putting a price on fossil carbon. Thankfully, your analysis focused on the merits of the plan rather than the dismissive cynicism found in much of the political press.
There is a growing movement among Republicans to shed the blinders and get serious about climate change. This is evident in last year's formation of a bipartisan Climate Solutions Caucus in Congress.
Of course, once an effort to tackle climate change across party lines begins to gain traction, special interests, who profit from the status quo, will sharpen their knives. Cleverly framed information, such as that offered by Thomas Pyle's "Carbon tax bad for Americans," will abound.
Ignore the critics. Climate change is a monumental risk to the global economy on which our prosperity depends. The "refundable carbon tax" described in your editorial is a powerful entry in the search for economically sound solutions.
Rick Knight
Citizens' Climate Lobby
Brookfield, Ill.
If skeptics are not convinced of the reality of climate change by the rising temperatures, rising seas and an alarmed scientific community, then these well-respected Republicans might just do the job.
Whether we pay more in taxes now is not the real question. Betting against the statistics and scientists on climate change is gambling on high stakes. If the peril of global warming is a myth, then the scientific community will eat crow and life will go on. However, if the experts are right, and global warming is really a problem of the scale and severity that they tell us, think of the eventual cost to the U.S. alone: rising seas displacing huge numbers of people, massive infrastructure repairs on short notice and an agricultural model that must be overhauled to compensate for a warmer climate.
We can pay now and step away from fossil fuels in a measured and controlled way, or pay later as we struggle to handle multiple emergencies at once. For goodness' sake, let's pay now!
Anna Gooding-Call
Salem, Mass.
FACEBOOK
The carbon tax plan sounds like a very dangerous idea. Climate change would be turned into another investment vehicle that would allow Wall Street to further fleece Main Street.
Jennifer Lapsner
All that solar and wind energy is just ridiculous! Don't tax the thing that works. Fossil fuels power the world. Until there is a cheaper option, don't bug me with this make-believe idea called "alternative energy."
David Southall
Anyone who thinks our natural resources are nothing but exploitable, endless and expendable has a hole in their head. We need to realize that our future generations might not have clean air, pure water, wildlife or even the ability to sustain ourselves.
Michael Anthony Shea
A ridiculous waste of time even before the details are worked out. A bookkeeping nightmare and a bureaucrat's wet dream. And who pays? Us. Always us. People who think that taxing basic support, like energy , will be covered by tax rebates are fooling themselves.
Dana Holgate 



Snowboarders raise their voices; Athletes sending Trump message on climate change
USA 





With Donald Trump not yet in office in early January, the advocacy group Protect Our Winters sought a way to reach out to the then-president-elect. So it tried to engage Trump on his turf -- Twitter.
Protect Our Winters, or POW, launched a Twitter campaign encouraging the incoming president to keep the Paris Agreement, an international effort to curb greenhouse gas emissions. Some of the top athletes in snow sports -- including Olympians Devin Logan, Alex Deibold, Elena Hight and Danny Davis -- echoed the message.
"There was really no direct line to him through like the White House switchboard," said Chris Steinkamp, executive director of Protect Our Winters. "Then we realized, my god, he's on Twitter all the time, and nobody's really used that medium in reverse. He's very famous about trying to let us know what's going on, but we've never really messaged to him."
Steinkamp says the #keepparis campaign reached 11 million people, although it did not get a response from Trump. The hashtag was tweeted 24,000 times Jan. 5-6, when POW was leading the campaign, according to Twitter.
"As you know, these athletes don't give a damn. They stand up for what they want to stand up for," Steinkamp said. "The steeper the hill for these guys, the better."
They recognize the steepness of the challenge now. Trump made comments in the past and during his presidential campaign that climate change is a hoax perpetuated by the Chinese. He has said he is considering backing out of the United States' commitment to the 2015 Paris climate agreement.
Now past Trump's inauguration, those involved in snow sports generally -- and snowboarding in particular -- have tried to further advocate on issues they've long supported. That's primarily, but not exclusively, been around climate change, an issue many athletes have partnered with POW on for years.
"I wouldn't say that I see a renewed focus, but what I do see is almost sort of like buckling down," said Deibold, a bronze medalist in the 2014 Sochi Games. "I think that we realize that the work we're doing now is more important than ever because we're fighting such an uphill battle."
Steinkamp says POW has had an "outpouring of people" wanting to get involved and donate since Trump's election. Donations are up 50% to 75%, he said. The organization says it has more than 130,000 supporters worldwide.
For the athletes involved, the story is not just theoretical. POW was founded in 2007 by professional snowboarder Jeremy Jones, and athletes have long been a part of the organization's voice. It has the support of athletes across snow sports, including skiing, ice climbing and mountaineers.
Anecdotally, the athletes see the impact that the scientific community, which has reached a consensus in man's role in climate change, finds in data. Scientists from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration reported last month that 2016 was the USA's second-warmest year on record. NASA said 16 of the 17 warmest years have occurred since 2001.
"When there's someone in power who cares about that stuff and whatnot, you have a little less feel to be involved," Davis said. "And then when you have someone maybe like now, you almost feel the need to be more involved and voice it out, educate people."
Steinkamp and Donna Carpenter, who is the CEO of Burton, which makes snowboards and apparel, and a member of POW's board of directors, said athletes' voices resonate in a way advocates' voices sometimes can't. For example, an Olympian might be able to get POW a meeting with a senator rather than a chief of staff.
And they see a role for that advocacy in snowboarding's history, one in which it grew up in opposition to the ski industry, whose resorts initially barred snowboarding.
"I think snowboarders and snowboarding is in a position to say no, we speak truth to power, and the truth is we're better off with a diverse community and we're better off obviously addressing climate change, and we're better off facing the fact of globalization," Carpenter said.
Carpenter sees a role for businesses in the way some decided not to move to North Carolina after the passage of HB2. The law, known as the bathroom bill, prevents cities and counties from passing protections based on sexual orientation and gender identity and mandates that public schools require bathrooms or locker rooms be designated for use only by people based on their biological sex.
The NBA pulled its 2017 All-Star Game from the state, and the NCAA moved its championships.
Carpenter said companies like hers that are invested in snow sports would be wise not to invest in or move to states whose representatives deny climate change.
For Carpenter, the advocacy doesn't end there though. She spoke to USA TODAY Sports at the X Games a week after she personally sponsored about 30 Burton employees to attend the Women's March the day after Trump's inauguration.
"We're the rebellious adolescents of the ski industry," she said. "We look at things a little bit differently and a little irreverently. We question authority, and we always have." 



Right-wing group builds media empire; Catholic fringe organization wants to tear down wall of church and state
US





Inside a plain, two-story brick building in Ferndale hums the nerve center for a growing, Catholic fringe group hoping the forces that elected President Trump will tear down the wall between church and state.
Church Militant broadcasts pro-life, anti-gay, anti-feminist, Islam-fearing, human-caused-climate-change-denying orthodox Catholic news on its website churchmiltant.com and through social media using high-tech, professional production studios that rival those at local TV news stations. It has 35 full-time employees (and is hiring more) who publish about 10 stories and three videos every weekday.
Its leader, Michael Voris, has compared Trump with Constantine, the Roman emperor whom he says was "not a moral man" but a "power-hungry egomaniac," but who saw it desirable to end the persecution of Christians. He was a human vessel who elevated Catholicism to the state religion, Voris said.
For this analogy, it's irrelevant whether the man has been married three times or owns casinos.
"The personal proclivities, the personal sins or life of a particular leader is a separate discussion from how that man's view of the world might influence his policies," Voris said. "And if that policy is favorable to the church, well then, very good."
Many of Church Militant's headlines are similar to those on Breitbart News, the far-right news organization that White House chief strategist Steve Bannon previously ran. Many of Breitbart's articles are cited on the Church Militant website. But unlike Breitbart, Church Militant is under a Christian, 501(c)(3) non-profit organization.
It's not affiliated with the Catholic Church, which has taken action to distance itself from Church Militant. And Voris said he doesn't think his organization's political statements are violating what he calls the "stupid" restriction on political campaign intervention for tax exemption from the Internal Revenue Service.
Church and state have long been linked in this country, he said, and the combination of social media and Trump in the White House have altered the notion of mainstream media.
"The entire established order has been thrown up into the air," Voris said. "What we say now has some credence. We're allowed into the discussion."
Church Militant's audience includes more than 180,000 Facebook likes, about 30,000 YouTube subscribers and nearly 12,000 Twitter followers. Voris estimates the operation, including social media and the website, accumulates about 1 million to 1.5 million online views per month.
A report the Detroit Free Press ran using SimilarWeb analytics, which don't measure social media traffic, estimates the website had a six-month peak of more than 750,000 visits in October and about 531,000 in December.
The organization's global audience is about 10 times bigger than it was five years ago, and Voris said the non-profit's revenue is "well past" seven figures -- but declined to be specific. In 2014, the non-profit St. Michael's Media that is connected to Church Militant reported total revenue of more than $1.6 million, according to the 990 form it is required by the IRS to submit every year.
Voris said the heart of what they do is Catholic theology. They operate as a news source with analysis and commentary, the "news is a door into the theology," and premium users receive additional theological content, he said. He also said he thinks Trump's presidency "will even the playing field," allowing for his apostolate's influence to spread.
"The problem with America is America never sat down and had the right discussion about which religion is the right religion," Voris said, adding that Trump is making that discussion possible.
Years ago, Voris caused an uproar when he said this in one of his videos: "The only way to run a country is by benevolent dictatorship, a Catholic monarch who protects his people from themselves and bestows on them what they need, not necessarily what they want."
The Free Press previously reported that he apologized. But Voris last Monday said he "didn't apologize for the principle." He said Americans have been living in a "secular dictatorship," and solid moral principles are expressed in Catholicism "more perfectly than any other" source.
"When it comes to moral issues, look what Obama threatened: North Carolina said it would not abide by transgender bathrooms," he said, adding that Obama said he'd "pull $30 billion of your funding. How is that not a dictatorship?"
(After North Carolina passed a law regarding gay and transgender rights, President  Obama's administration considered withholding federal funding. But USA TODAY reported in May 2016 that the administration decided not to; instead, it pursued a separate enforcement action in federal court. Reuters reported the state stood to lose $4.8 billion, mostly in education grants.)
Mark Weitzman, based in New York for the Simon Wiesenthal Center, a Jewish human rights organization, describes Church Militant as "radical traditionalist Catholics." He said such organizations are a small movement "with some influence and the ability to make a lot of noise."
They espouse beliefs that God's promises to the Jewish people were stripped away and assigned to Christians after the coming of Jesus, resulting in ideas that are theologically -- not racially -- anti-Semitic, Weitzman said.
Voris said that one doesn't speak "in terms of theology, of being anti-religion," and that "being anti-Semitic is, it's a political term ... that's supposed to shut down conversation."
Voris said he isn't a "secret Nazi white supremacist." When the Free Press asked him about Weitzman, Voris said, "I consider him an extreme leftist Marxist, probably bordering on atheist."
Weitzman said that for these groups, religious liberty is a "difficult and disquieting concept" that they'll do what they can to chip away at it. 



Hyundai Ioniq hybrid is all about efficiency; Model ready to turn heads with rating of 58 miles per gallon
U





With all the talk about hybrid and electric cars, you'd think they'd be making a bigger impact on the sales lot.
They aren't.
Hybrids from all brands made up only 2% of sales in 2016, and plug-in hybrids and pure electrics contributed another 1%, Hyundai says. Against the backdrop of cheap gas and a buyers' sudden affection for SUVs, maybe the pitiful sales figures are not surprising.
But with tougher restrictions on tailpipe emissions to fight global warming forcing better fuel economy, automakers can't afford to go without some more fuel-sipping models -- even if they're tough to sell.
So Hyundai just came up with a model that it hopes will get eco-car buyers chattering. The new Ioniq hybrid comes with a distinct selling point that should make it an instant contender: better gas mileage than the perennial industry hybrid leader, Toyota Prius.
Ioniq is rated at 58 miles per gallon in combined city and highway driving for its base version, called the Blue. That will not only be the highest rating of any car without a plug, but will best Prius by 2 mpg.
The more upscale versions of Ionic are rated at 55 mpg combined.
The new Hyundai could be a welcome alternative for those turned off by the recent-vintage Prius' funky styling. Ioniq achieves low wind drag in a more conventional design.
Forget that Ioniq is a hybrid and you'll pretty much think you're driving any economy car. It's built on the same platform and has the same drivetrain as the Kia Niro, a new small crossover from Hyundai's sister brand. We raved about the Niro in our recent review because of how it melded economy and practicality in a unique way. Ioniq nails the fuel savings but didn't strike us as terribly memorable otherwise.
Driving near Goleta, home to the University of California, Santa Barbara, we found the Ioniq to have enough pep for freeway onramps, but there's little to boast about if you want to be wowed behind the wheel.
Ioniq will be sold as a hybrid, a plug-in hybrid and a full electric (which we will review at a later date.)
With the plug-in not yet available, the focus is on the hybrid, which uses a 1.6-liter 4-cylinder engine in conjunction with an electric motor. Together, they deliver 139 horsepower. The powertrain is paired to a 6-speed dual-clutch transmission.
The battery is tucked under the rear seat, a feature that ensures that it doesn't encroach on passenger space. One nice touch: The lithium-ion polymer battery starts the car. Drivers will never get caught with a dead conventional lead-acid battery again, because none is aboard.
Hyundai also says Ioniq has more room inside than a Prius. Two 6-foot-2 dudes fit fine in the Ioniq -- me in the front seat and another fellow directly behind in the back seat.
The sedan also has a spiffy interior. We were particularly impressed by the high-quality grain on the dashboard.
So OK, America is living large again and automakers can't produce hulking SUVs fast enough. But there's still room for those who want a small, cheaper, more Earth-friendly lifestyle.
For them, Ioniq could just be the tonic.
WHAT STANDS OUT
Gas mileage: Better than a Prius
Space: More than a Prius
Design: Less funky than a Prius
HYUNDAI IONIQ
What: The hybrid version of a five-door hatchback that will also come as a plug-in and full electric.
When: Just came to showrooms.
Where: Made in South Korea.
What makes it go: A 1.6-liter 4-cylinder engine and 6-speed dual-clutch transmission coupled with an electric motor and lithium-ion polymer battery.
How thirsty: 57 miles per gallon in the city, 59 mpg on the highway and 58 mpg overall on the base version; 55 mpg combined on the more upscale versions.
How big: 14.7 feet long.
How much: Starts at $22,200, plus $835 shipping.
Overall: Worth a look if you're a hybrid buyer. 



Study: People start 84% of U.S. wildfires; Climate change still a factor but humans lengthen fire season
USA





The horrific wildfire that scorched Gatlinburg, Tenn., in November, killing 14 people, was human-caused -- and that's not unusual: Whether deliberate or accidental, a whopping 84% of all wildfires in the U.S. are started by people, says a new study.
The remaining 16% are started naturally, by lightning, according to the report, one of the most comprehensive to date.
The study also found that humans have added almost three months to the national fire season on average. "Thanks to people, the wildfire season is almost year-round," said study lead author Jennifer Balch of the University of Colorado. Humans also account for nearly half the acreage burned each year.
Balch and her study co-authors looked at 1.5 million wildfires from 1992 to 2012 and found that the human-ignited fire season was three times longer than the lightning-ignited fire season and also added an average of 40,000 wildfires per year.
"Fires are burning earlier in the spring in the Southeast and later in the fall in the West," Balch said. Fighting wildfires in the U.S. has exceeded $2 billion in recent years, the study said.
"Although considerable fire research in the United States has rightly focused on increased fire activity (larger fires and more area burned) because of climate change, we demonstrate that the expanded fire niche as a result of human-related ignitions is equally profound," the study said.
Catastrophic fires have scorched the Western U.S. over the past decade. Several states, such as Washington and California,  have seen some of their largest wildfires ever recorded.
"We have known for a long time that fires set by people are an extremely important factor in wildfire problems, but this study shows in detail how important people are in lengthening the fire season and contributing to increasing numbers of large wildfires," said Thomas Swetnam of the University of Arizona, who was not involved in this research.
It's not that people are becoming more careless or  more arson is occurring, he said. He said lightning-caused fires are  increasing in the West because of warming temperatures, earlier springs and  droughts, which mean "that climate change is still a primary driver of the trends."
The study appeared in the  journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 



Energy order takes focus off climate; Environmentalists protest president's rejection of Obama-era initiatives





President Trump's executive order on American energy independence is a sweeping repudiation of Obama-era environmental initiatives, substituting a strategy of combating climate change through international cooperation for an America-first energy policy.
Trump proclaimed the order as "the start of a new era of American energy production" that would "restore economic freedom and allow our workers to thrive, compete and succeed on a level playing field for the first time in a long time."
Trump spoke at a signing ceremony at the Environmental Protection Agency on Tuesday on a stage with a dozen coal miners.
Trump's order attempts to roll back Obama-era policies on power plant emission limits, coal mining on federal lands, fracking and methane. Because most of those rules were finalized under Obama, the Trump administration would have to start from the beginning on a rulemaking process to dismantle those regulations.
Trump's order takes aim at the entire framework of climate change action under the previous administration.
Under Obama, federal agencies were required to plan for and mitigate the future effects of climate change, treat it as a national security issue and attempt to reduce their own greenhouse gas emissions by 40%. All of those policies are rescinded by Trump's order.
Environmental activists deplored the order.
Annie Leonard of Greenpeace USA said it showed Trump is "just a fossil fuel industry stooge with a presidential pen."
She cast the executive order as a temporary setback.
"Thankfully, for all his bluster, the best Trump can do is delay America's inevitable transition to clean energy, but he can't stop it," she said.
The White House said Trump's action will provide the framework for a new  emphasis on  more energy production and more jobs.
Despite relaxing environmental standards, the White House argued that its energy policies could be good for the environment in the long term.
"The president strongly believes that protecting the environment and promoting our economy are not mutually exclusive goals," spokesman Sean Spicer said Tuesday. "This executive order will help to ensure that we have clean air and clean water without sacrificing economic growth and job creation."
The order will ask all federal agencies to identify obstacles to domestic energy production, then report back to the White House for future action.
Trump said the order is "returning power to the states, where that power belongs."
The order makes good on Trump's promise to end what he called a "war on coal" and to bring back industry jobs. "I made them this promise. We will put our miners back to work," Trump said Tuesday.
"The war on coal is over," Vice President Pence said at the executive order signing ceremony Tuesday, flanked by Secretary of Energy Rick Perry, Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke and EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt.
Former vice president Al Gore called the order "a misguided step away from a sustainable, carbon-free future for ourselves and generations to come."
"No one man or group can stop the encouraging and escalating momentum we are experiencing in the fight to protect our planet," Gore said. 



Here are 10 Obama environmental policies Trump wants to scrap; President gets ball rolling with latest executive order





An executive order President Trump signed Tuesday won't just repeal his predecessor's regulations on power plants. It's a sweeping demolition of Obama-era policies on coal mining, fracking, greenhouse gas emissions and climate change.
Trump's executive order takes aim at a wide range of Obama policy tools, including executive orders, presidential memoranda, regulations and policy guidance. Some of those Trump can eliminate with the stroke of a pen. Many would require a new regulatory process, which could be subject to new lawsuits and controversies.
One senior administration official, speaking to reporters on condition of anonymity Monday because the order had not yet been finalized, identified at least 10 specific Obama policies that Trump would attempt to undo. They include:
1. A 2016 Obama memorandum identifying climate change as a national security issue, and directing the Pentagon and other agencies to "ensure that climate change-related impacts are fully considered in the development of national security doctrine, policies, and plans."
2. A 2015 Obama executive order requiring agencies to take steps to reduce their consumption of fossil fuels, with a goal of a 40% reduction in greenhouse gases produced by the federal government.
3. A 2013 Obama executive order directing federal agencies to prepare for and mitigate the effects of climate change, including "an increase in prolonged periods of excessively high temperatures, more heavy downpours, an increase in wildfires, more severe droughts, permafrost thawing, ocean acidification, and sea-level rise."
4. The Clean Power Plan, an ambitious rule that attempted to set a national limit on carbon emissions from existing power plants. That rule has already been temporarily held up by the Supreme Court. If not already struck down by the courts, the Environmental Protection Agency would have to go through a new rulemaking process to seek comments on any new rule dismantling the Obama policy.
5. The new plant rule, another component of the Clean Power Plan that addresses new power plants. It, too, would be subject to a new rulemaking process.
6. The consideration of the social cost of greenhouse gases and climate change in conducting environmental impact assessments, expanding the scope of the National Environmental Policy Act. That policy change came in a guidance document from the White House Council on Environmental Quality last August, and can be immediately rescinded.
7. The moratorium on coal mining on federal and tribal lands. This change doesn't require a new regulation and can be implemented immediately.
8. A 2016 regulation from the EPA limiting methane emissions from the oil and gas industry. Like all final regulations, the Trump administration would have to start the regulatory process from the beginning in order to rescind the rule.
9. A similar rule from the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) limiting "venting, flaring and leaking" on oil and gas wells on federal lands, which would also be reviewed for possible repeal.
10. The BLM's hydraulic fracturing rule, which tightened standards on gas well construction, governed the disposal of fracking waste and required disclosure on the fracking chemicals used. That rule has also been held up in court, but would require a new rulemaking process to formally take off the books. 



Trump exposes climate deal; Power plants executive order shows that Paris Agreement is a paper tige





President Trump's executive order eliminating President Obama's standards for power plants guts the only substantial U.S. measure to reduce harmful carbon emissions, and in doing so reveals the emptiness of the Paris climate treaty.
Climate change is real and mostly caused by humanity. According to the International Energy Agency, the U.S. promised to cut more energy-related CO2 emissions than any country in the world from 2013 to 2025. The problem is that this promise never had much ground in reality.
The primary substantial measure America has ever offered that would achieve the promised cuts was the Clean Power Plan, which required the U.S. power sector to reduce CO2 emissions.
Yet  if fully enacted, it would have achieved just a third of the U.S. promises under the Paris Agreement. If it had remained in effect for the entire century, my peer-reviewed research using United Nations climate change models found that it would have reduced temperature rises by a  trivial 0.023 Fahrenheit.
wasted decades
Without the Clean Power Plan, U.S. emissions will likely increase slightly. Yet despite eliminating the actual policy that it relied on to achieve its promises, America will remain party to the Paris treaty, which has been sold to the world as the ultimate deal to fix climate change.
This absurd situation shows that the treaty is nothing but a paper tiger: Its only legal underpinning is that all nations submitted promises -- but those promises do not need to be kept.
Even if every nation fulfilled everything promised,  it would get us nowhere near achieving the treaty's  unrealistic goal to keep temperature rises under 1.5 degrees Celsius. The U.N. itself has estimated that even if every country lived up to every single promised carbon cut between 2016 and 2030, emissions would be cut by just one-hundredth of what is needed to keep temperature rises below 2 C.
Moreover, many poor nations signed the treaty largely because of a promise of $100 billion a year in "climate aid" from rich nations, starting from 2020. Over the past five years, rich countries have managed to come up with only a 10th of one year's promise.
It is only a matter of time before taxpayers from wealthy nations balk at the bill waiting for them. That will make many developing countries back out.
This  approach rehashes a failed policy that wasted decades: From 1998, the Kyoto Protocol was sold as the solution to climate change, although every honest analysis  showed that its impact would be trivial. Yet it kept governments, non-profit organizations and pressure groups focused on living up to the protocol rather than finding  solutions.
Unless we change tack, the preoccupation with a similarly toothless Paris treaty will waste decades more.
The underlying problem with the treaty is that today's green solar and wind technology is still very inefficient, requiring hundreds of billions in annual subsidies for trivial carbon cuts. Therefore, trying to cut emissions significantly requires not just buying off poor nations, but also very high costs.
Calculations using the best peer-reviewed economic models show the global price tag of all the Paris promises -- through slower gross domestic product growth from higher energy costs -- would reach $1 trillion to $2 trillion every year from 2030.
And if America had managed to pass carbon-cutting policies to live up to its big promises, analysis shows that it would have reduced U.S. GDP by more than $150 billion each and every year throughout the century.
We need to focus instead on innovating the price of green energy down below fossil fuels. This would be a much more effective response to climate change, and speed up temperature cuts.
empty promises
A panel of Nobel laureates for the project Copenhagen Consensus on Climate found that the best long-term policy should focus on dramatic increases in global energy research and development.  A group led by Bill Gates has already stepped up to promise a doubling to $30 billion. Yet our researchers showed that we should be even more ambitious and increase this sixfold, to reach at least $100 billion a year. Trump campaigned on  increases in infrastructure spending. Especially given he has proposed  cuts to clean energy agencies, it is to be hoped that more money is allocated to energy R&D.
Global warming is a challenge that deserves a response. But chasing a treaty of empty promises is no response at all.
Bjorn Lomborg, director of the Copenhagen Consensus Center, is author of The Skeptical Environmentalist. 



So why don't they believe it?; Political disunity, social media, lack of accepted experts accent our differen





Thousands of scientists and their allies filled the streets of the nation's capital on Earth Day for the March for Science, advocating for the importance of scientific truth in an era we've ominously been told doesn't value the truth any longer. Just a week later, the People's Climate March in Washington, D.C., will demand policymakers not only respect science, but that they also act on it.
Advocates say science is under attack. President Trump's Environmental Protection Agency chief Scott Pruitt doesn't accept evidence that shows humans are causing climate change. Education Secretary Betsy DeVos' 2001 comments on wanting to "advance God's kingdom" through education have educators worried she could undermine the teaching of evolution in public schools. Trump's budget blueprint slashes funding for the National Institutes of Health and the Department of Energy's Office of Science.
Esteemed astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson, in an impassioned video on his Facebook page, said he fears people have lost the ability to judge what's true and what's not.
"That is a recipe for the complete dismantling of our informed democracy," he says.
The scientific community is alarmed by the Trump administration, and by what they see as the diminishing role of objective science in American life. But the General Social Survey, one of the oldest and most comprehensive recurring surveys of American attitudes, shows that although trust in public institutions has declined over the last half century, science is the one institution that has not suffered any erosion of public confidence. Americans who say they have a great deal of confidence in science has hovered around 40% since 1973.
Many scientists say there is no war on their profession at all.
According to the 2016 GSS data released this month, people trust scientists more than Congress (6%) and the executive branch (12%). They trust them more than the press (8%). They have more trust in scientists than in the people who run major companies (18%), more than in banks and financial institutions (14%), the Supreme Court (26%) or organized religion (20%).
So why all the headlines about the "war on science"?
Though science still holds an esteemed place in America, there is a gap between what scientists and some citizens think -- a rift that is not entirely new -- on issues such as climate change, nuclear power, genetically modified foods, human evolution and childhood vaccines.
Americans don't reject science as a whole. People love the weather forecast. They love their smartphones. When people reject science, it's because they're asked to believe something that conflicts with a deeply held view, whether political (my party does not endorse that), religious (my god did not say that) or personal (that's not how I was raised).
Many conservatives reject the science of man-made climate change, just as many liberals reject the science that shows nuclear energy can safely combat it. The views we express signal which political group we belong to. The gap between what science shows and what people believe, sociologists say, is about our identity.
"The issue of climate change isn't about what you know," said Dan Kahan, a professor of psychology and law at Yale and a member of the university's Cultural Cognition Project. "It's about who you are."
Many factors in play
Polarization has exacerbated our differences, and we know some of what's to blame: The rise of social media. A more partisan press. A dearth of universally accepted experts. And greater access to information, which Christopher Graves, president and founder of the Ogilvy Center for Behavioral Science, said does not tug us toward the center, but rather makes us more polarized.
"A human being cannot grasp something as a fact if it in any way undermines their identity," Graves said. "And that is an immutable human foible. These things have always been there, but not at scale."
The GSS data show confidence in institutions overall has been in decline since the 1970s, though political scientists  caution that this is an imperfect benchmark.
Brendan Nyhan, a political scientist at Dartmouth College, said trust in the mid-20th century was unnaturally high and polarization was unnaturally low, bolstered by unusual growth in middle class income and a reduction of inequality, which is when the "20th century version of the American dream and the trust in government to produce it was fully mythologized."
"There was an usually high level of trust that came out of World War II, before the turn towards a more cynical view of the institutions of society -- especially politics and media -- after Vietnam and Watergate," Nyhan said.
So how much more polarization can we expect?
Social scientists aren't sure, but they agree Trump complicates things.
"He really is an us-versus-them figure," Kahan said. "People aren't thinking about the arguments. They're thinking about what side they're on."
Think about the way you search for information. If you're a new mom who believes vaccines cause autism (and a number of women in your mommy group do, too) are you searching for research that shows whether they actually do, or are you Googling "vaccines cause autism" to find stories to affirm your belief? (Studies show there is no link between vaccines and autism.)
The mother above is probably motivated by fear. Such "motivated reasoning," says political scientist Charles Taber of Stony Brook University, shows that we are all fundamentally biased.
"You have a basic psychological tendency to perpetuate your own beliefs," he said "to really ... discount anything that runs against your own prior views."
It gets even more complicated. Once we've convinced ourselves of something, research suggests facts don't appeal to us. A study co-led by Nyhan found that trying to correct a person's misperception can have a "backfire effect." When you encounter facts that don't support your idea, your belief in that idea actually grows stronger.
So what if we did a better job teaching people how science works? Doesn't help, Kahan said. Research shows people with the most science intelligence are also the most partisan.
Curiosity can be crucial
It's not knowledge but curiosity, Kahan says, that makes us more likely to accept scientific truths. A recent study that Kahan led found people with more scientific curiosity were more likely to be open-minded about information that challenged their existing political views.
And arguing helps, too. Scientists Hugo Mercier and Dan Sperber contend in their new book, The Enigma of Reason, that reason isn't something that evolved so humans could solve problems on their own. It developed so we could work together.
Instead of forcing someone to agree that climate change is caused by humans, Graves said, you can stop once you agree that, for example, flooding in Florida is a problem, and that you have to fix it (the bipartisan Southeast Florida Regional Climate Change Compact can teach us about that).
Marcia McNutt, an American geophysicist and president of the National Academy of Sciences, said she isn't worried about a crisis of science, though she hopes more people would understand "science is about the unbiased search for truth" -- and that benefits everyone.
"Being a scientist only means that when I have an intuition about something, I test that intuition, and see if I'm right," she said. "A very, very smart mentor told me once, 'I don't trust anyone who hasn't at least changed their mind once in their career.'"
Science, it appears, may have more lessons for us than we think. 



Another day, another march. Then





Living here, I see national landmarks so  often that I'm annoyed when people ask me to take them to the Lincoln Memorial. It also desensitizes me to every march, protest or strike of the day. Two weeks ago it was the March for Science, last week it was The Great March for Climate Change, and this weekend it will be The Immigrants' March.
But a strike in my hometown of San Juan, Puerto Rico, on Monday did  hit this cynical Washingtonian. After Puerto Rico's debt ballooned to a point of no return, the island's finances were handed over to an oversight board created by Congress last year. Much like the case with President Trump in the mainland, recommendations, changes and appointments are starting to have an impact on the island's economy and its people's bottom line.
Although I repudiate the violence that took place at the march in Puerto Rico's financial district, it's understandable -- not to mention convenient for those who wanted to undermine the protest.
Therein lies the problem. Marches are a frail tactic to raise awareness. A broken window or tear gas thrown and the message  loses all meaning.
Take the Women's March here. There's no beating more than 2 million attendees. But what did it accomplish other than show discontent? Do marches produce tangible results anymore? Some might still believe that. The March for Science on April 22 is credited for a $2 billion boost for medical research at the National Institutes of Health. But let's be honest, the march would have been little more than a nice gesture had people not testified before Congress, or run campaign ads directed at lawmakers.
I went to a  liberal college  in Rio Piedras, and we were known as the "strikers." During my four years, none of the almost yearly strikes stopped tuition hikes or funding cuts.  At a student assembly when they were voting for yet another strike, I spoke up: "What's the point? We're known for doing strikes. From an outside perspective, this just looks like a bunch of whining college kids."
And that still holds true. One more protest in Puerto Rico or Washington is the equivalent of Cher announcing another last tour. March, by all means, but  civic engagement, more specifically grassroots lobbying, is  the most powerful tactic citizens have.  As someone who reads emails and letters from readers every day, I can assure you: If I receive more than three comments  on the same issue, I'm paying attention.
Why do you think the One Million Moms group can get TV shows to drop  sponsors they deem inappropriate or get them canceled altogether? Because their efforts don't end with a march, they start with one. From there you create contacts,  build coalitions and activate people.
I'm not suggesting ridiculous protests like threatening a boycott because the Disney channel aired a gay kiss. How about trying to prevent the reauthorization of the Export-Import Bank, or pushing for an audit of Puerto Rico's debt? There's so much that's important -- and can't get done with just a march.
Josh Rivera is the Your Say editor of USA TODAY. 



Study: Tornado havoc to triple in coming decades; Urban sprawl puts more people in the path of disast





The number of deaths and damaged or destroyed homes caused by tornadoes in the U.S. could triple by the end of the century, and man-made climate change may not be entirely to blame.
Instead, the culprit is population increase and urban sprawl, according to a new study. Simply put, there will be more homes -- and people -- in the path of tornadoes.
We're already well on our way: In the past several decades, development in the 48 contiguous states more than quadrupled, said study lead author Stephen Strader of Villanova University's Department of Geography and the Environment.
"Disasters are socially constructed," he said. We're "building ourselves into disasters."
Residents in tornado-prone regions should be more concerned with the construction quality of their homes than possible impacts climate change could bring, such as an increase in the number or intensity of twisters, neither of which have been concretely forecast, Strader said. To minimize the risk, homeowners and businesses should look at building storm shelters or safe rooms, he added.
Violent and deadly tornado outbreaks are a serious threat each year across the U.S., the most tornado-prone nation on Earth. So far this decade, the U.S. has endured 46 separate severe storm and tornado outbreaks that each caused more than $1 billion in damage, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said.
Tornado expert Harold Brooks of the National Severe Storms Laboratory, who was not involved in the study, said the research methodology and findings are sound.
"One of the things I really liked about it was its realistic look at the future exposure of human beings to tornadoes," he said.
Already this year, twisters have killed dozens of people in the U.S. In addition, nearly 700 tornadoes have been reported, more than 100 above average, the Storm Prediction Center reported.
In upcoming decades, the increasing number of homes, structures and developed land in tornado-prone regions such as the Southeast, Midwest and Plains will be at greatest risk, especially sprawling metropolitan areas such as Atlanta, Chicago, Dallas and St. Louis. Deaths are most likely in the Southeast because of it large suburban footprint, Strader said.
The study appeared in the peer-reviewed journal Climatic Change. 



Shifting climate thins tree cover in East; Some species could go extinct, study





It's getting so hot that even the trees are heading north.
Man-made climate change -- including warmer temperatures and deviations in rainfall patterns -- appears to be one of the reasons tree populations in the eastern USA are shifting north and, more surprisingly, west, according to new research.
The shift could lead to the extinction of certain trees in select forests, the study said.
Overall, the changing climate has pushed trees an average of 20 miles north and 25 miles west over the past 30 years. Though the northern shift was expected because of warming temperatures, researchers said the more surprising westward movement could be the result of a change in rainfall patterns.
When researchers analyzed the impact of climate change, they found precipitation had a stronger impact on forests in the short term than temperatures, said lead author Songlin Fei of Purdue University.
The eastern USA has gotten warmer over the past few decades, and the Southeast has trended drier.
Fei said deciduous trees such as oak and maple primarily move west, and evergreens move north. Trees don't actually move, of course, but where they sprout can change. Saplings can expand into a region while older growth dies in another, The Atlantic reported.
One of the more striking examples is the scarlet oak, which in nearly three decades has moved more than 127 miles northwest from the Appalachians, Fei told the Associated Press. Its population is reduced in the Southeast and more pronounced in the Midwest.
Brent Sohngen of Ohio State University, who was not involved in the study, told the AP the findings show "there is no doubt some signature of climate change."
The research, which studied 86 species of trees and was based on  data gathered by the U.S. Forest Service, was published in the journal Science Advances. 



Allies grow distant after Trump leaves; For Europeans especially, cordial tone takes on an edg





President Trump received a largely cordial welcome on the first overseas trip of his presidency. But now that he has returned to Washington, the foreign leaders he met with are increasingly blunt in their reviews of the American president.
In separate remarks intended mostly for domestic consumption, leaders of Germany, France and Israel  sought to distance themselves from Trump just days after meeting with the president during his nine-day foreign trip to Saudi Arabia, Israel, Vatican City, Brussels and Italy.
Among the sources of friction: Trump's reluctance to unreservedly commit to the North Atlantic alliance; his skepticism of a climate change accord signed by his predecessor, President Obama; and outreach to Palestinians in pursuit of a Middle East peace agreement.
"It's clear that in Europe at least, that anti-Trump position plays well domestically," said Ivo Daalder, a former U.S. ambassador to NATO in the Obama administration. "But the larger issue is that the trip didn't go well in Europe."
The dynamic is partly one of Trump's brash style. "I think what grates on European leaders is the sense that he does not treat them as equals, let alone as allies," Daalder said. "He approaches them in this confrontational way, in an attempt to constantly get a better deal out of them."
Trump hasn't spoken about the trip publicly, avoiding news conferences for the entire journey. But on Twitter, he pronounced the mission a triumph. "Just returned from Europe. Trip was a great success for America. Hard work but big results!" Trump tweeted on Sunday.
The reaction abroad was more cautious:
France: New French President Emmanuel Macron said his now-famous white-knuckled handshake with Trump was a deliberate attempt to demonstrate that he wouldn't be bullied by the American president. "One must show that you won't make small concessions, even symbolic ones, but also not overpublicize things, either," he told the French newspaper Journal du Dimanche. "My handshake with him -- it wasn't innocent."
Germany: Chancellor Angela Merkel said Sunday at a Bavarian beer hall that Europe can no longer "fully rely" on its overseas allies. On climate change, she said, the Group of Seven meeting was "seven against one" -- counting the European Union as part of the seven (and the United States as the one). Her chief political rival took umbrage at the way Trump sought to "humiliate" Merkel in Brussels. "I reject with outrage the way this man takes it upon himself to treat the head of our country's government," said Martin Schulz, who is challenging Merkel for the chancellorship as an "anti-Trump" candidate. He said Trump was "acting like an autocratic leader."
United Kingdom: British Prime Minister Theresa May is upset that American intelligence officials leaked information about the Manchester concert bombing to the media. Trump acknowledged that he got an earful from May, tweeting Sunday that she was "very angry" about the leaks. "Gave me full details!"
Israel: Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who has said Israel has "no better friend" than Trump, appeared to hold the president at arm's length on Monday. Speaking to members of his conservative Likud party, Netanyahu warned that a Trump-brokered peace negotiation with the Palestinians "comes at a price."
Palestinian Authority: An Israeli television station reported that Trump shouted at Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas, during their meeting in Bethlehem last week yelling, "You tricked me!" and accusing the Palestinian Authority of inciting violence in the West Bank. (The Palestinians denied the report.)
In Europe, Trump's "America First" foreign policy appeared to alienate other members of NATO,  the 68-year-old alliance intended to contain Russia -- the country at the center of a growing controversy over ties to Trump aides.
At a ceremony meant to solemnize the collective defense provision of the NATO charter in Brussels, Trump failed to explicitly reassure European allies that the U.S. would come to their aid in the event of an attack. Instead, he renewed his complaints that they were not paying their fair share. (In doing so, he misrepresented the commitment by NATO allies to spend at least 2% of their economies on defense.)
But among Trump supporters, his tough talk to foreign leaders drew raves. Sen. Bob Corker, the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said he "could not be more pleased." 



Allies grow distant after Trump's trip; For Europeans especially, cordial tone takes on an 





President Trump received a largely cordial welcome on the first overseas trip of his presidency. But now that he has returned to Washington, the foreign leaders he met with are increasingly blunt in their reviews of the American president.
In separate remarks intended mostly for domestic consumption, leaders of Germany, France and Israel  sought to distance themselves from Trump just days after meeting with the president during his nine-day foreign trip to Saudi Arabia, Israel, Vatican City, Brussels and Italy.
Among the sources of friction: Trump's reluctance to unreservedly commit to the North Atlantic alliance; his skepticism of a climate change accord signed by his predecessor, President Obama; and outreach to Palestinians in pursuit of a Middle East peace agreement.
"It's clear that in Europe at least, that anti-Trump position plays well domestically," said Ivo Daalder, a former U.S. ambassador to NATO in the Obama administration. "But the larger issue is that the trip didn't go well in Europe."
The dynamic is partly one of Trump's brash style. "I think what grates on European leaders is the sense that he does not treat them as equals, let alone as allies," Daalder said. "He approaches them in this confrontational way, in an attempt to constantly get a better deal out of them."
Trump hasn't spoken about the trip publicly, avoiding news conferences for the entire journey. But on Twitter, he pronounced the mission a triumph. "Just returned from Europe. Trip was a great success for America. Hard work but big results!" Trump tweeted on Sunday.
The reaction abroad was more cautious:
France: New French President Emmanuel Macron said his now-famous white-knuckled handshake with Trump was a deliberate attempt to demonstrate that he wouldn't be bullied by the American president. "One must show that you won't make small concessions, even symbolic ones, but also not overpublicize things, either," he told the French newspaper Journal du Dimanche. "My handshake with him -- it wasn't innocent."
Germany: Chancellor Angela Merkel said Sunday at a Bavarian beer hall that Europe can no longer "fully rely" on its overseas allies. On climate change, she said, the Group of Seven meeting was "seven against one" -- counting the European Union as part of the seven (and the United States as the one). Her chief political rival took umbrage at the way Trump sought to "humiliate" Merkel in Brussels. "I reject with outrage the way this man takes it upon himself to treat the head of our country's government," said Martin Schulz, who is challenging Merkel for the chancellorship as an "anti-Trump" candidate. He said Trump was "acting like an autocratic leader."
United Kingdom: British Prime Minister Theresa May is upset that American intelligence officials leaked information about the Manchester concert bombing to the media. Trump acknowledged that he got an earful from May, tweeting Sunday that she was "very angry" about the leaks. "Gave me full details!"
Israel: Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who has said Israel has "no better friend" than Trump, appeared to hold the president at arm's length on Monday. Speaking to members of his conservative Likud party, Netanyahu warned that a Trump-brokered peace negotiation with the Palestinians "comes at a price."
Palestinian Authority: An Israeli television station reported that Trump shouted at Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas, during their meeting in Bethlehem last week yelling, "You tricked me!" and accusing the Palestinian Authority of inciting violence in the West Bank. (The Palestinians denied the report.)
In Europe, Trump's "America First" foreign policy appeared to alienate other members of NATO,  the 68-year-old alliance intended to contain Russia -- the country at the center of a growing controversy over ties to Trump aides.
At a ceremony meant to solemnize the collective defense provision of the NATO charter in Brussels, Trump failed to explicitly reassure European allies that the U.S. would come to their aid in the event of an attack. Instead, he renewed his complaints that they were not paying their fair share. (In doing so, he misrepresented the commitment by NATO allies to spend at least 2% of their economies on defense.)
But among Trump supporters, his tough talk to foreign leaders drew raves. Sen. Bob Corker, the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said he "could not be more pleased." 



Climate change could foul up precipitation; Study warns of redistributed rain around the wo





Last month alone, climate change was blamed for sleepless nights and trees moving west. Now there's a new problem: weird rainfall.
A study in the journal Science Advances suggests climate change will alter where rain falls around the world, making wet areas wetter and dry areas drier, especially in the summer.
The world's rainiest areas may push north during the winter, said study lead author Aaron Putnam, a glacial geologist at the University of Maine. The redistribution of rainfall is worrisome, he said, as it would affect water availability for people around the world.
The shift isn't unprecedented: It's happened before, but that was because of natural climate change.
Researchers studied ancient climate history to see how a warming climate changed rainfall patterns. About 14,600 years ago, a shift in temperature changed where precipitation fell over the entire planet, much like the predicted effect of man-made global warming over the next few decades.
Global warming occurs when heat-trapping carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases are emitted into the air by burning coal, oil and other fossil fuels, which boosts world temperatures to levels that scientists say cannot be explained by natural factors.
The study "adds to the large body of evidence that climate change is going to mess with the large-scale motions of air and water in the atmosphere," NASA climate scientist Kate Marvel, who wasn't involved with the study, told Wisconsin's Beloit Daily News. "And this matters, because those patterns largely determine where it's rainy or arid, broadly speaking,"
According to NASA, rising temperatures will intensify the Earth's water cycle, increasing evaporation. This increased evaporation will result in more storms but also contribute to drying over some land areas.
As a result, storm-affected areas are likely to experience increases in precipitation and increased risk of flooding, while areas far away from storm tracks are likely to experience less precipitation and an increased risk of drought. 



Musk: I'll quit Trump council if climate-change deal d





Billionaire innovator Elon Musk threatened to withdraw from President Trump's Business Advisory Council if the White House withdraws from an international agreement aimed at curbing climate change.
The CEO of Tesla and SpaceX had previously defended his decision to remain on the panel of advisers, arguing that it was better to have a seat at the table than to withdraw altogether and lack a voice on key issues.
But he drew the line at the possibility that Trump would abandon the Paris climate-change agreement, which President Obama's administration endorsed as a key step toward combating the global threat of rising temperatures.
"Will have no choice but to depart councils in that case," Musk tweeted Wednesday in response to a question from a follower.
In an earlier tweet, he said: "Don't know which way Paris will go, but I've done all I can to advise directly to POTUS, through others in WH & via councils, that we remain."
A Tesla spokesperson declined to comment further on Musk's tweet.
Asked whether Musk is a trusted adviser of the president, White House spokesman Sean Spicer said, "The president has a lot of people that he gets input from on a lot of issues."
Though he opposed Trump's election, Musk faced scrutiny for sticking by the council after Trump took office.
Embattled tech contemporary and Uber CEO Travis Kalanick withdrew after Trump's temporary travel ban on people from certain countries in the Middle East stirred controversy. Musk said at the time that he would seek a consensus of fellow council members on recommendations for changes that could be suggested to Trump.
But Musk has long held climate change as a personal passion topic.
He even positioned Tesla as a beacon of hope because its electric vehicles do not generate carbon emissions that cause global warming.
He said in February in connection with a trip to the White House that he wanted "to provide feedback on issues that I think are important for our country and the world."
Contributing: Ledyard King 



Trump's Paris pullout endangers the p




Decades from now -- if sea levels continue rising, polar ice caps keep melting and weather patterns grow ever more extreme -- people might well look back at the spring of 2017 as a key turning point in the failed effort to stave off catastrophic, human-induced climate change.
President Trump's decision Thursday to withdraw the United States, the world's second largest emitter of heat-trapping carbon dioxide, from the Paris climate agreement deals a body blow to one of the best hopes for slowing a ruinous rise in global temperatures.
By breaking ranks with nearly 200 nations, the United States joins only Syria (which is riven by civil war) and Nicaragua (which thinks the Paris agreement isn't ambitious enough) as the odd countries out. The Trump administration's action abdicates America's moral leadership and makes it easier for other nations to renege on their own pledges to curb greenhouse-gas emissions.
In making his reckless decision, Trump defied the advice of the world's leading climate scientists. Of Pope Francis and other religious leaders. Of the leaders of the seven wealthiest democracies. Of major corporations, including Chevron, Google, Facebook and Apple. Of members of his own inner circle, including son-in-law Jared Kushner and daughter Ivanka. Of his own secretary of State, a former ExxonMobil CEO.
And Trump ignored the wishes of most Americans, seven out of 10 of whom favor the Paris agreement.
But the president -- prodded by chief strategist Steve Bannon, Environmental Protection Agency administrator Scott Pruitt and coal-state Republicans in Congress -- thinks he knows better. At Thursday's Rose Garden announcement, Trump argued that the 2015 agreement "handicaps the United States economy," even though there is no binding deal, only voluntary pledges by each nation to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
He expressed concern about job-killing restrictions. Yet the Paris accord restricts  nothing. Instead, it relies on peer pressure and transparency to limit global warming to a more tolerable level. Trump could have revised President Obama's pledges without ending U.S. participation.
Trump made a  nod toward renegotiating the Paris agreement, or crafting an entirely new pact that would be "fair" to the United States. But it's hard to imagine  other nations rushing back to the bargaining table after Trump walked away from an agreement that grew out of decades of arduous climate talks.
Other governments, notably in the European Union and China, vow to forge ahead developing the clean-energy technologies that will be the drivers of economic growth in the 21st century. But global warming is a problem that requires a global solution. The margin for tilting the planet away from catastrophic climate change in the future is slim, and no matter the slack picked up by other nations in the absence of U.S. leadership, it might not be enough.
The 45th president dreams of a legacy where America is great again. There was no greatness in the decision he rendered Thursday, just the heightened prospect of a climate-stricken globe left behind for future generations. 



Out of pact, u.s. has rough road ahead; Paris exit jeopardizes ability to negotiate, experts





President Trump's decision Thursday to exit the Paris climate agreement is likely to give a small and immediate lift to the oil and coal industry, which makes good on a persistent campaign promise.
But, economists and energy experts warn, over time the controversial decision to drop out of the international pact to help stem climate change may hamper the nation's ability to financially capitalize on the globe's shift to renewable resources.
Leaving the Paris agreement jeopardizes the United States' ability to be a global leader in new clean technology developments and sell those insights to a world hungry for cheap energy, experts say.
"The biggest danger in leaving the accord is you lose your seat at the negotiating table for all climate talks to come," says Shayle Kann of GTM Research, which does market analysis on next-generation energy solutions. "If you're not able to negotiate bilateral agreements, that can impact U.S. exports of our own leading-edge technology."
Trump's decision runs counter to the advice of some of his closest advisers, including daughter Ivanka. It also flies in the face of pleas from everyone from Exxon CEO Darren Woods, who wrote Trump asking him to keep the U.S. seat at the bargaining table, to Tesla CEO Elon Musk, who has made good on his vow to quit the president's economic council if Trump opted out of Paris.
"Climate change is real," Musk tweeted. "Leaving Paris is not good for America or the world."
Other business leaders reacting swiftly and negatively to the news, included Salesforce founder Marc Benioff and Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella.
Benioff tweeted that he was "deeply disappointed" by the decision, noting that his company would continue to strive to run only renewable energy.
Nadella tweeted that "climate change is an urgent issue that demands global action" and linked to Microsoft President Brad Smith's blog post that noted a weeks-long effort to lobby, along with other business leaders, the White House to stay in the agreement.
In making the announcement, Trump seemed to leave the door open for joining a modified global pact under terms he believes are more favorable to the U.S.
"We are getting out," Trump said at a White House ceremony. "But we will start to negotiate, and we will see if we can make a deal that's fair. And if we can, that's great."
Kann  is among those who don't see a big immediate economic effect on the clean-energy movement in the U.S. as a result of the decision. He says that Americans ultimately vote with their pocketbooks, which means any clean-energy solutions  that can reduce their monthly bills will continue to get support.
In the short run, withdrawing from the accord will negate the impact of possible carbon emissions fees on gas and electricity costs, economist Gregory Daco of Oxford Economics says. And Mark Zandi, chief economist of Moody's Analytics, notes the decision will likely slow job losses in fossil fuel industries, such as coal, as well as job gains in renewable energy, such as solar and winds.
But, Zandi adds, employment in coal already has been shrinking in part because natural gas has become a cheaper and cleaner power source. And renewable energy already has seen job growth, partly as a result of state mandates and lower prices that have encouraged many home owners to install solar panels on their rooftops, for example. As a result, the short-term effect on U.S. employment likely would amount to just several thousand additional jobs, Zandi says.
"Why would you try to help the coal industry while reducing investment in future energy such as solar, wind and storage? This is crazy," says Mike Phillips, CEO of Sense, maker of a high-tech power-measurement device for smart homes.
Job creation in renewable energy dwarfs coal, which was an obsession with Trump on the campaign trail, Phillips says, citing a Department of Energy report in January that noted the coal industry employs about 160,000 in the U.S. and is shrinking, while jobs are growing in the areas of energy-efficiency (2.2 million), natural gas (400,000), solar (374,000) and wind (102,000).
Zandi says Trump's decision makes it less likely the U.S. will be at the forefront of clean energy innovation, possibly costing the country as many as hundreds of thousands of jobs over the next decade or two. "We're not going to lead the way," he says. 



Trump had the U.S. take a step back as a l




LETTERS
In pulling the U.S. out of the Paris climate agreement, President Trump is creating damage somewhere between a disaster and a catastrophe. Obviously, refusal to curb its greenhouse gases by the world's second biggest carbon polluter (us) will accelerate global warming's impacts, e.g. sea level rise, severe storms, droughts, floods and extinctions of endangered species.
But that's not all. The climate change skeptic is also ceding America's leadership in the world. No more will other countries follow our lead, or even agree to cooperate with us, having seen that at any time our president can pull out, rescind or cancel our agreed-upon responsibilities.
We are losing the competition to lead the next technological revolution, that of sustainable energy production. China now leads in solar, Denmark in wind, Netherlands in tides. America leads in turning backward and inward.
As our planet's temperature increases, we will suffer more destruction from hurricanes, flooding, drought and fires. The productive jobs not created by committing to sustainable energy will require jobs to clean up debris, fight fires, build seawalls and bury victims.
Bruce Joffe
Piedmont, Calif.
TWITTER
Our followers shared their thoughts on President Trump pulling the U.S. out of the Paris climate agreement.
Good for Trump. He needs to continue taking care of America, not the world.
@JRivera1964
Trump did the best thing for America, not globalists!
@kel2195
Countries need to know we're partners, not their banker. #AmericaFirst
@DebbieBrandt1
For more, follow @USATOpinion or #tellusatoday.
FACEBOOK
Part of President Trump's campaign was a promise to bring back coal jobs, but the majority of Americans already knew he'd have no influence in the coal industry.
We need to look toward other energy sources.
Jeff Hartung
People all around the world look to the United States as a global leader. What today represents is Trump leading us back to the Stone Age. He is absolutely deplorable.
Climate change skeptics will be the first ones to sue the federal government when their waterfront homes in Florida are under water. Thanks, Trump, for one massive step backward.
Michael Shea
What people around the world look to the United States for is our money. The common thread to all the programs Trump is canceling is that they are all bad economic deals for the country. He wants other NATO countries to pay their agreed share. What a bad man for thinking that, right?
Trump is backing out of the Paris agreement, which had us shipping lots of money to those with their hands out. For the first time in quite a while, a U.S. president is actually watching the store.
Dave Hammond
Coal is not the future. Renewable and clean energy can be cheaper and better. Let's get on board with the Paris agreement again. Let's keep our country exceptional.
Robert Montgomery 



Rising seas doom a cherished way of life; Alaska islanders 'tied to this land' forced to face an agonizing re





Annie Weyiouanna remembers her home being bigger. For decades, the relentless Chukchi Sea has been washing away the fine sand that makes up Sarichef Island, and this Iupiaq village of 650 now faces a stark choice: Move or drown.
"You are taking away our identity," Weyiouanna says. "That's like a punch in the gut. That's who we are -- we are tied to this land and the sea."
Regardless of debates about climate change, there's no question the island is shrinking. Satellite images taken over the past 20 years show how far the shoreline has receded, drawing ever closer to the small homes huddled on what is little more than a large sandbar.
Federal officials estimate the island loses somewhere between 9 and 22 feet of shoreline every year, although a massive seawall built from rocks barged in from the mainland has slowed the process.
Still, that rock wall protects only the hardest-hit areas from erosion, and the wind carries away sand year-round from the island's highest point, about 20feet above sea level.
Many of the native people here blame human-caused climate change for accelerating the island's erosion and worry that President Trump's decision to pull out of the Paris climate agreement will supercharge the destruction that's already occurring. One government estimate says the majority of the town's homes could be uninhabitable within 15 years.
What's worse, they say, is Trump's proposed federal budget would eliminate  money they hoped could pay to relocate the village to the mainland about 20miles away in what would be a years-long logistics nightmare of barges, temporary roads and construction of a new airstrip. One U.S. Army Corps of Engineers estimate put the moving cost at $180 million for a town where the median household income is less than $30,000 a year. And Shishmaref is just one of more than 180 coastal towns in Alaska facing such problems, although federal officials say it's one of the most precariously situated.
Beyond cost, a move raises more personal questions. Community identity here is often tied to a specific location, where fathers pass down tips on the best hunting sites to their sons, where grandmothers take kids fishing for dinner and where virtually everyone is related to their neighbor.
"We have no choice. Our island is getting smaller. It isn't getting bigger," ivory carver Edwin Weyiouanna said.
Understanding what's happening to Sarichef Island requires a bit of a history and geology lesson. The island, about 100 miles from the Russian mainland, is part of a land bridge that once connected the North American continent to Asia. Researchers have concluded North America was initially populated by people and animals that made their way across that land bridge before it disappeared. The people who live on the coasts of both continents are related to one another and used to routinely shuttle across in boats before the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union ended that practice. On a clear day, you can see Russia from their island.
Today, the residents of Shishmaref live a largely subsistence-based life.  They boat to the mainland to hunt caribou and ducks and gather berries. They fish and shoot seals for meat for them and their dogs.
Few have running water inside their homes. Instead, they buy water delivered by barge during the summer and collect crystal-clear freshwater ice from the mainland for drinking. They also depend heavily on food stamps to buy dried ramen noodles and eight kinds of Spam at the town's two grocery stores, along with so much soda that the town's dentist shakes his head in frustration. Health care is provided to most everyone  free under Medicaid.
Without running water, few people have flush toilets. Instead, they use buckets fitted with toilet seats and then bag up the waste for transport  to a sewage lagoon. Trash gets hauled to a landfill at the island's south end and burned, and animal carcasses lie half buried in the snow or dirt.
Dogs chained up outside the modest houses bark at strangers, and residents drive most everywhere on four-wheelers or snowmobiles or side-by-sides rather than walking the few blocks from one end of the town to the other.
Many of the approximately 150 houses are owned by the local housing authority, and the local government is the largest employer here. The land on which the town sits is owned by the tribe's native corporation, which means few people have any significant financial resources.
The plot where they might relocate is also owned by the tribal corporation. It's surrounded by the 2.6-million-acre Bering Land Bridge National Reserve, which means the federal government's permission would be required to build roads and  create a quarry for foundation materials.
Flights off the island cost about $400 round-trip, and that will get you only to Nome, population 3,500, about 120 miles away. The Army Corps estimates moving and assimilating the entire population of Shishmaref into Nome would cost about half what it would take to rebuild the town in an entirely new location, but residents here say that would destroy their  sense of identity.
This island, be it ever so humble, is home.
At least for another decade. Maybe. It depends on whether sea level rise speeds up, a big storm again knocks out the defensive wall or warmer winters continue melting the protective sea ice that surrounds the island for much of the year. The ground itself is softening, the once-frozen permafrost melting, and there's little vegetation to stop the top layers from blowing away.
"I wish we didn't have to move," Lorraine Jungers said as she shopped at one of the stores with her teenage daughter. "I know the benefits of moving. But we'd be too far apart from the people that mean the most to us. This is our whole life right here. I can't picture us anywhere else."
Some residents don't think the town will move. They say there's no way to pay for it and no way to physically move an entire village across miles of open water to reach the mainland. In that event, residents here would slowly disperse over time as the water flowed its way inland.
Even if the relocation happens, they fear there will be no way to maintain the same sense of community in a new place. Other struggles include questions over polar bears coming onto the mainland, whether to move the bodies buried in the island's small cemetery, and how to overcome the inertia that comes with having lived in the same small piece of land for generations.
The effort to move has been underway, in one form or another, for years. Residents have voted multiple times to relocate to the mainland, and several have testified before Congress. A youth ambassador from Shishmaref attended the 2015 Paris climate talks.
Still, not much has changed despite more than a decade of lobbying, votes and media attention.
And the clock is ticking.
Shishmaref native Esau Sinnok has already seen the island lose at least 100 feet of coastline in his 19years, and a dozen houses, including his grandmother's, were relocated in 1997 to stave off  collapse into the ocean.
Emergency protection  has proved costly: In 2001, the state paid $110,000 to install sand-filled wire baskets along the western shore. They lasted through only the next storm.
A more expensive and extensive sea wall built in pieces in the late 2000s has helped protect a small portion of the island's west closest to homes, but satellite images show it merely moved the erosion  a little farther along the shore, closer to the airstrip.
The lack of action under President Obama frustrated  residents ready to move. They wonder why Obama could commit so many billions of dollars to fighting climate change abroad while not doing more to help Americans.  Things will be worse, they fear, under Trump.
"He doesn't believe climate change is real," Annie Weyiouanna said.
"I think it's scary." 



To fight climate change, start with celebs, 





If climate change is really such a crisis, and if sacrifice on our part is needed to stop it, why aren't we seeing more sacrifice from people who think it's a problem?
As one person asked on Twitter, "What if climate scientists decided, as a group, to make their conferences all virtual? No more air travel. What a statement!" And what if academics in general -- most of whom think climate change is a big deal -- started doing the same thing to make an even bigger statement?
What if politicians and celebrities stopped jetting around the world -- often on wasteful private jets instead of flying commercial with the hoi polloi -- as a statement of the importance of fighting climate change?
And what if they lived in average-sized houses, to reduce their carbon footprints? What if John Kerry, who was much put out by President Trump's withdrawal from the non-binding Paris agreement, gave up his yacht-and-mansions lifestyle?
What if, indeed? One reason so many people don't take climate change seriously is that the people who constantly tell us it's a crisis never actually act like it's a crisis. Some might say that's why we need laws. I have some proposals that take climate change seriously indeed.
First, we need to tax the "blue zones." That is, we need to impose steep taxes on property in coastal areas that will be flooded by the sea-level increases that global warming is supposed to bring. By discouraging people from living or building there now, we'll save ourselves from big problems in the future. Sure it'll drive down property values, but those values should go down -- that property is going to be flooded anyway, remember?
Second, we need to ban taxpayer-funded air travel to conferences. State legislatures could ban reimbursement for travel outside their states; Congress could require that no federal grant money be spent on air travel to conferences and similar events. A lot of academic conferences would fail, but that's a small price to pay for saving the planet.
Third, we need to ban private jet travel. It's nice that Leonardo DiCaprio can jet around the world speaking against climate change, but the carbon emissions involved set a bad example that outweighs anything he might say. So no more private jets. Bigshots will just have to fly commercial like everyone else, the way they did in the 1950s. Politicians, too, should have to fly commercial. No more government-funded "executive jets" for them.
Fourth, we need a luxury tax on mansions. Any home more than twice the size of the average American home should be taxed at 25% of its value per year.
I'm sure enterprising members of Congress and state legislatures can come up with more ideas. But the important thing is to set a good example: Treat climate change like the crisis you say it is, and maybe more people will believe it really is a crisis.
Glenn Harlan Reynolds, a University of Tennessee law professor and the author of The New School: How the Information Age Will Save American Education from Itself, is a member of USA TODAY's Board of Contributors. 



Trump: Government needs an upgrade; Tech titans called upon to modernize outmoded agenc





President Trump and leaders of major U.S. tech companies remain at odds on immigration and climate change, but they met Monday at the White House to work on a joint project: using technology to make government more efficient.
"Today, many of our agencies rely on painfully outdated technology, and yet we have the greatest people in technology that the world has ever seen right here with us in this room," Trump told his guests, kicking off what aides have dubbed a "technology week" of events focused on innovation in the government.
"Government needs to catch up with the technology revolution," he continued.
This was the inaugural meeting of Trump's American Technology Council, a group of tech leaders and administration officials committed to modernizing government information technology and digital services.
Trump's guests at the White House included Apple CEO Tim Cook, Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos, Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella, Oracle co-CEO Safra Catz and Eric Schmidt, executive chairman of Google's parent company.
Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg was invited but could not attend the meeting due to scheduling conflicts, said a person familiar with the matter who was not authorized to comment publicly.
After Trump asked his guests at the technology roundtable to speak individually, Cook said the government should have the most modern equipment, and "today it doesn't." He added that computer coding should be a required subject in school. Bezos said the U.S. needs to work on machine learning and artificial intelligence.
During a session with the same CEOs earlier in the day, White House senior adviser Jared Kushner said the Trump administration wants tech companies to help "modernize the government's technology infrastructure," by developing or consulting on new solutions for complex challenges such as delivering veterans' health care benefits and managing budgets.
Kushner, Trump's son-in-law, helped organize the meeting as head of the White House Office of American Innovation.
In Kushner's presentation Monday -- among his rare remarks in public -- he said federal agencies maintain 6,100 data centers, many of which can be consolidated. He said the government still has data systems that are up to 56 years old, including the continued use of floppy disks at the Pentagon.
Yet the summit, the second between the administration and some of the technology industry's biggest names, highlights a relationship that has been fraught with tension and sharp political differences. Few in left-leaning Silicon Valley publicly supported Trump. Adding to the acrimony, dozens of executives signed an open letter opposing Trump's presidency. The president  skewered Apple and Amazon in tweets and on the campaign trail for sending jobs overseas. He also has taken issue with tech companies' strong stands to protect widespread encryption on consumer devices for the sake of users' digital security and privacy. 



N. Korea shoves to top of G-20 agenda; U.S. warns of harsh penalties if missile-brandishing regime can't exercise restra





President Trump's return to Europe this week was supposed to focus on resolving many of the lingering issues from his trip there in May, when he exposed rifts with allies over defense spending, trade and climate change.
But North Korea's missile test July 4 put the rogue regime at the forefront of the annual meeting of the Group of 20 largest economies, where the major players in the escalating crisis will be represented: the United States, Russia, China, Japan and South Korea.
As Trump departed for Warsaw on Wednesday, he tweeted at China, spoke to world leaders aboard Air Force One and prepared for a special meeting of the G-20 in Hamburg on Thursday night to discuss security on the Korean Peninsula.
"Perhaps China will put a heavy move on North Korea and end this nonsense once and for all!" Trump tweeted Monday after the North Korean missile test.
Harry Kazianis of the Center for the National Interest, a Washington-based think tank founded by President Nixon, said Trump's tweets are intended to send a "strategic signal" to China.
During the Cold War, nuclear powers would demonstrate their resolve by lining up bombers on the runway or opening and closing the doors to nuclear missile silos, he said. Trump uses a smartphone. "This is Trumpian-style signaling to the Chinese," Kazianis said. The message: Trump's conciliatory posture toward China on trade and other issues may come to an end.
Though Trump took a hard line on China during the presidential campaign, pledging repeatedly to label China a currency manipulator, he reversed course after his meeting with President Xi Jinping in April. "Why would I call China a currency manipulator when they are working with us on the North Korean problem?" Trump tweeted. "We will see what happens."
As Trump's tweets on China have grown tougher, so have the actions taken by the administration.
In the past week, the Trump administration has imposed secondary sanctions on Chinese entities doing business with North Korea, ordered U.S. ships through a South China Sea passage claimed by China and approved a $1.4 billion arms sale to the Taiwan, which China views as a renegade province.
Meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin in Moscow before the G-20 summit, Xi said only that the Korean situation was "complicated" and that "the present world is disquieting." He signed on to a joint statement seeking a negotiated solution that would link a nuclear freeze by North Korea with a halt to joint military exercises by the United States and South Korea.
The United States rejected that condition and engaged in a test missile launch of its own with South Korea.
In a joint statement, U.S. and South Korean commanders noted that the Korean War technically never ended. "Self-restraint, which is a choice, is all that separates armistice and war," said the statement from U.S. Gen. Vincent Brooks and South Korean Gen. Lee Sun Jin.
The Trump administration also ramped up diplomatic pressure. "Any country that hosts North Korean guest workers, provides any economic or military benefits or fails to fully implement U.N. Security Council resolutions is aiding and abetting a dangerous regime," Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said Tuesday.
U.N. human rights investigators said North Korea has exported more than 50,000 workers, taking most of their pay to provide much-needed foreign currency for the regime.
China and Russia are the most common destinations for North Korean guest workers, but they're used for hard labor in Qatar, the Persian Gulf country on a building spree for the 2022 World Cup. 



Trump, Merkel vie for lead role; G-20 summit shapes up as showdown between Germany and the U





A leader-of-the-free-world showdown looms between German Chancellor Angela Merkel and President Trump when she hosts the Group of 20 summit in Hamburg starting Friday.
Based on global opinions of the two leaders, think of a matchup between Europe's real-world political Wonder Woman without the skimpy outfit and a supervillian not dissimilar to Ares, the Greek god of war and archenemy of the comic book character in the new movie.
The two-day G-20 summit brings together the leading industrialized and emerging economies that represent 85% of global GDP for discussions that will include terrorism, global trade, climate change and conflicts that have spawned a flood of refugees. But everyone will be looking to see who picks up the mantle of world leadership.
A survey of world opinion published by Pew Research Center last week found negative views of Trump and many of his actions, such as withdrawing from international trade and climate change accords and a temporary ban on entry into the U.S. by people from six Muslim-majority nations.
Just 22% of those surveyed in 37 countries have confidence in Trump to do the right thing when it comes to international affairs.
A U.S. poll published by Quinnipiac University on June 8 found that only 46% of American voters view Trump as the "leader of the free world," while 29% said it is Merkel. Voters disapproved of Trump's handling of foreign policy, especially his "unfriendly" approach to European and NATO allies.
In the face of Trump's unpopularity, Merkel may try to show  that "Germany, perhaps along with a few of its friends, are the real leaders of the free world," said Michael Wohlgemuth, a Berlin political affairs expert.
"People trust her. She seems to be a reliable broker. She doesn't come up with very radical views," he said. "In fact, she takes an extremely mainstream, multilateral position on most issues, but she stands firmly against protectionism and isolationism -- qualities that the G-20 was, after all, originally established to fight against."
Merkel presides over Europe's largest economy, which is on the upswing, and she has the most clout among the 28 nations that belong to the European Union and the 19 that use the euro currency -- although she doesn't always get her way.
Merkel, Europe's longest serving leader, took the lead in welcoming war refugees fleeing to Europe and she is in a strong position to win a fourth term as chancellor  this fall.
Merkel and Trump have met three times since he took office in January, and none of the encounters said much for their personal chemistry.
Four days after a G-7 summit in Sicily in late May, Merkel said in remarks seen as a rebuke of the American president that "the times in which we could completely rely on others are over to a certain extent."
Merkel did not hide her disappointment that Trump wouldn't endorse an international pact to combat global warming -- an agreement he withdrew from once back on American soil. Her comments also reflected a rocky NATO summit in Brussels earlier in May, when Trump failed to publicly back the military alliance's doctrine of collective defense, as every U.S. president has since Harry Truman.
And at their first face-to-face meeting at the White House in March, the body language between the two leaders was awkward. When she asked Trump for a handshake in the Oval Office in front of the news media, he didn't respond and appeared stone-faced before the cameras.
Merkel recently told the German Parliament that the Paris climate accord is "irreversible" and not "negotiable," and that the EU is "more determined than ever" to see it succeed -- even without American participation.
"We cannot expect easy talks in Hamburg," Merkel said. "The disagreement is obvious, and it would be dishonest to gloss over it. I won't do that, in any case."
In another sign of fraying U.S.-German tensions, a video feed of U.S. Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross was cut off mid-speech last  week as he addressed a business conference in Germany organized by Merkel's ruling Christian Democratic Union party.
The event's organizers said Ross went over his allotted 10-minute slot. His speech repeated critical comments made by Trump about Germany's trade surplus with the U.S. The German audience cheered when the video feed was silenced.
Merkel and Trump also are contrasting personalities. He is spontaneous, boastful and unpredictable in actions and tweets. She is cautious, modest and deliberate in word and deed.
While some G-20 participants may look to Merkel for leadership, Germany's history as the Nazi aggressor in World War II makes it hard for the country to take on too dominant a global leadership role today, said Peter Beyer, a politician from Merkel's party.
"You will never hear any of this 'leader of the free world' language from Merkel," he said.
Beyer said Merkel has more than Trump to worry about at the summit. Also attending is Russian President Vladimir Putin, who opposes EU sanctions imposed in response to Russia's intervention in Ukraine. His government also is accused by Western leaders of trying to disrupt elections in their countries, including the U.S. and Germany.
Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan poses another challenge for her. He wants entry into the EU, but Merkel has been critical of his crackdown on democratic institutions since a failed coup a year ago. Erdogan also is a key player in the EU's efforts to limit the flow of migrants to Europe by paying to keep them in Turkey.
Putin and Erdogan "will also be in the room in Hamburg and it's going to be a real challenge to get the balance right," Beyer said. Merkel "has to create an atmosphere without too much tension. But she will, as she always manages to on these occasions, by being calm, polite, professional, sticking to the facts." 



127 million Americans are breathing bad air; Pollen, smog levels a 'double whammy





About 40% of Americans live in counties where a "double whammy" of unhealthy levels of smog and ragweed pollen -- both tied to climate change -- combine to threaten respiratory health, a Natural Resources Defense Council report said Tuesday.
"Today, 127 million Americans live where ragweed and ozone can threaten their next breath," said Kim Knowlton, senior scientist at the council,  who oversaw the project. "This health threat will just get worse if we don't curb climate change soon."
Climate change, caused by the burning of fossil fuels such as oil, gas and coal, both worsens ozone pollution and extends the ragweed season, the report said.
The late summer and early autumn season for ragweed pollen is now almost a month longer in many parts of the U.S. than it was 20 years ago, and that trend is likely to continue, the council said.
Smog forms on warm, sunny days and is made worse from the chemicals that are emitted from vehicle tailpipes and from power plant and industrial smokestacks. It worsens respiratory illnesses such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.  Plus, allergies alone can be life-threatening, especially in children, said Perry Sheffield, a pediatrician at Mount Sinai in New York.
In addition, air pollution from smog and allergens doesn't just damage the lungs, it also affects the brain, heart and skin. "Clean air is so important for human health," Sheffield said.
Ragweed was selected for this report instead of other pollens, such as tree and grass, because more people are allergic to it than to all the others combined, Knowlton said.  Ragweed comes out toward late summer when temperatures and smog levels are the highest.
The report focuses on 15 of the worst jurisdictions where  smog and pollen are especially bad. Those, listed in order starting with the worst:  District of Columbia, Connecticut, Rhode Island, Illinois, Pennsylvania, Utah, Ohio, Arizona, Michigan, Massachusetts, Delaware, Wisconsin, New Hampshire, Indiana and Kansas.
"It's ironic and tragic that the nation's key 'hot spot' is Washington, D.C., the very place where wrongheaded policy threatens to make climate and pollution problems worse by the day," said Juanita Constible of the NRDC. Instead of dismantling the Clean Power Plan, the federal government should focus on limiting smog, curbing power plant pollution and increasing vehicle fuel efficiency, she added.
The group said governments at the state and local levels should also work to ramp up the use of clean energy and diminish smog levels, among other actions. 



Parisians turn up their noses to Trump visit; Many just baffled by Macron's invitation of U.S. president






Parisians are greeting President Trump's visit Thursday for Bastille Day celebrations in the way the French do best: total disdain.
"Pfff -- he should just go to Pittsburgh," student Marie Billoteau, 24, said, harking to Trump's explanation June 1 for withdrawing from the Paris climate change agreement: "I was elected to represent the citizens of Pittsburgh, not Paris."
Many expressed bewilderment that their new president, Emmanuel Macron, invited an American president who had supported Macron's right-wing opponent and disagrees with the French government on a range of international issues.
Others just shrugged and said Trump will enjoy his first visit here as president to be feted as the guest of honor.
Thursday, Macron will host dinner at the Jules Verne restaurant atop the Eiffel Tower with creations by one of France's most celebrated chefs, Alain Ducasse. Friday, Trump will watch the annual Bastille Day parade down the Champs-Elyses with all its pomp and circumstance.
Billoteau said she just hopes Trump behaves: "He doesn't seem to know what is correct sometime."
A poll in May by Suffolk University found 82% of the French have an unfavorable view of Trump -- even more negative than Russian President Vladimir Putin and Chinese President Xi Jinping.
Still, the invitation was a brilliant move by Macron, said Eddy Fougier, a political scientist at the French Institute of International and Strategic Affairs in Paris. "Since Donald Trump declared a while ago that Paris wasn't Paris anymore, Macron probably wants to show him that Paris is still Paris," he said of the visit that includes honoring the 100th anniversary of the United States' entry into World War I.
Trump said in a 2015 TV interview about the wave of migrants entering Europe, "I was in Paris, and Paris doesn't look like Paris anymore."
"It's a pragmatic approach for Macron, and the fact that the U.S. president and troops will be in Paris will raise the profile of France in the world on the day," Fougier added.
Former presidential contender Jean-Luc Mlenchon of  far-left party La France Insoumise said he "deplores"  that Trump will be on French soil when the country marks its version of July Fourth -- the storming of the Bastille  during the French Revolution.
Demonstrations are expected to occur at  Place de la Republique and at least two other districts in central Paris during his visit.
"Trump is not welcome in Paris," organizers of Paris Against Trump wrote on their Facebook page. "We oppose his positions ... his sexist speeches and behavior, his Islamophobia and racist remarks."
Berton reported from Nice, France 



Wildfires a harbinger of global warmin




LETTERS
Many people are concerned about global warming but assume that its predicted damages will come well enough in the future that there will be plenty of time to deal with it later. This mindset is naive and dangerous. Wildfires are a case in point. The startling increase in the frequency and intensity of wildfires is strongly linked to global warming. So far, average temperatures in the western U.S. have risen less than 2 degrees Fahrenheit, yet wildfires are occurring nearly four times more often, burning more than six times the land area, and lasting almost five times as long.
By mid-century, summertime temperatures are projected to be 3.6 to 9 degrees Fahrenheit higher, enhancing evaporation rates, while precipitation is expected to decrease by up to 15%. Warmer and drier conditions will lead to widespread beetle and other insect infestations, resulting in broad ranges of dead and highly combustible trees. The costs in human life and health, property damage and state and federal dollars are devastating and will only get worse. Unless we create the political will to phase out coal, oil and gas, and transition to clean energy sources, climate change will usher in a very bleak future.
Robert Taylor
Newport Beach, Calif.
FACEBOOK
As typical, the overly hyped exaggeration of weather reporters comes to the forefront. What is often forgotten is that Los Angeles has seen hundreds of hotter days. The "131-year record" was for the temperature on that date only. The rest of California is seeing beautiful weather of 70-85 degrees, which is less than many years when we have experienced 100-degree temperatures in July.
Michael Conn
God bless and protect all the firefighters handling these wildfires!
Jim Vandegriff 



Union leader: School vouchers 'polite cousins of segregation'; American Federation of Teachers president assails Betsy DeV





In a blistering speech slated to be delivered to more than 1,400 teachers here on Thursday, American Federation of Teachers President Randi Weingarten likens U.S. Education Secretary Betsy DeVos to a climate-change denier, saying DeVos refuses to acknowledge "the good in our public schools and their foundational place in our democracy."
In her speech, to be delivered at the union's traditional summer conference, Weingarten says the Trump administration's school choice plans are secretly intended to starve funding from public schools. She called taxpayer-funded private school vouchers, tuition tax credits and the like "only slightly more polite cousins of segregation."
An advance draft copy of the speech was obtained by USA TODAY.
Vouchers, tax credits and private, for-profit charter schools, she alleges, "hide a dangerous ideological agenda" that destabilizes public schools. "And when a family chooses a private school, in reality it is the school and not the family that makes the choice."
In addition, Weingarten says, many private schools can -- and do -- discriminate against students because they're exempt from federal civil rights laws.
A longtime Michigan school choice advocate and GOP mega-donor, DeVos has championed both public- and private-school choice, saying the ability of families to pick a school that suits their child is an elemental right.
During her Senate confirmation hearing last January, she asked lawmakers, "Why, in 2017, are we still questioning parents' ability to exercise educational choice for their children?"
DeVos has trod a fine line on her judgments of public schools, saying that teachers "should be honored, celebrated, and freed up to do what they do best," but also that the current public system "is outdated and ultimately is not geared toward what is right and best for students."
The Trump administration's proposals for school choice have rankled teachers' unions, who say using public funds to send students to private schools -- or to those in which large numbers of non-unionized teachers work -- weakens the public system.
In her speech, Weingarten notes that school voucher plans in the South took root in the years after the U.S. Supreme Court's 1954 Brown v. Board of Education decision, which struck down segregation. Rather than integrate schools, she points out, white officials in Prince Edward County, Va., closed the entire system and created whites-only private schools, paid for by taxpayer dollars.
The real pioneers of school choice, she says, are "the white politicians who resisted school integration."
Weingarten also points out that recent research on vouchers, in particular, does not show promising results.
A June 2017 federally funded study on D.C.'s Opportunity Scholarship Program (OSP), a voucher that has been offered to families since 2012, found that it had a "statistically significant negative impact" on students' math achievement and essentially no impact on reading after one year. Parents weren't more satisfied with their children's schools, but the program had a significant positive impact on parents' perceptions of the safety of their child's school.
The U.S. Education Department did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Weingarten's remarks. 



Al Gore's 'Inconvenient Sequel' brings climate change to the trump era; New film is an updated, more intimate v





On June 1, President Trump announced his decision to withdraw the United States from the Paris climate accord, an international agreement aimed at helping countries reduce the effects of climate change.
It was a devastating blow for former vice president Al Gore, a tireless environmental activist who drew heat for his Oscar-winning global-warming documentary An Inconvenient Truth in 2006. He's back with its follow-up, An Inconvenient Sequel: Truth to Power (in theaters Friday in New York and Los Angeles, expands nationwide Aug. 4), which premiered at Sundance Film Festival in January to respectable reviews.
Despite having several conversations with the president, Gore has been unable to sway Trump, who has  called global warming an "expensive hoax."
"I tried as hard as I could, and even though hope springs eternal, I don't think there's any realistic prospect of Donald Trump coming to his senses on climate," Gore says. "I would love to be proven wrong, but I'm not going to hold my breath. We'll just have to work around him."
Like Truth, Sequel is loosely framed around a presentation Gore gives to environmental activists-in-training, listing findings about climate-related weather events and touting alternatives to burning fossil fuels. But the documentary also moves into the real world, as filmmaking duo Bonni Cohen and Jon Shenk follow Gore across the globe as he meets with political leaders and typhoon survivors, and attends the United Nations' climate-change summit in Paris in 2015.
"For so long, it was very difficult for people in the environmental movement to personalize the issue and make it immediate for people's everyday lives," Shenk says. "As storytellers, we had an 'aha' moment of 'If we tell the stories of people who are actually suffering and dealing with the front-line issues of climate change, then it could be film drama.'"
It was jarring at first for the politician to be shadowed so closely.
"It does take a little adjusting to have them following your every move practically for two years," Gore says.
With the sequel, Gore wanted to show what's changed, both good and bad, in the decade since Truth. At the original film's release, he was criticized for using a  simulation depicting the flooding of lower Manhattan to illustrate how  cities could feel the effects of  rising sea levels. That  came to pass in 2012, when the World Trade Center memorial was underwater during Hurricane Sandy.
But Gore has reason to be optimistic. As shown in the film, Georgetown, Texas, is one of the first cities in America to be 100% powered by renewable energy, with others such as Atlanta and Pittsburgh pledging to follow suit.
"The will to survive is itself a renewable resource," Gore says. "With Mother Nature playing an increasingly prominent role in the discussions about the climate, more and more people are realizing if the president won't lead, the American people must." 



Draft climate report contradicts Trump; Scientist worried administration will suppress information





The average temperature in the United States is rising fast because of "human activities," and Americans are already feeling the  effect of climate change, according to a draft federal report.
The draft, first reported on by The New York Times, contradicts claims by President Trump and his team, who have downplayed the human contribution to climate change and questioned the ability of scientists to predict its effects.
The Times cites a scientist involved in the report, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, saying he and others were concerned the report would be suppressed by the administration. The Times said the report had not yet been made public, but Environmental Protection Agency spokeswoman Liz Bowman said the report actually has been in the public domain since January.
"We continue to discuss the best path forward for an honest, open dialogue in regard to climate science," she said.
EPA administrator Scott Pruitt has been among the most vocal challengers of studies indicating carbon dioxide is a primary contributor to global warming. In his previous job as Oklahoma attorney general, he repeatedly sued the EPA over its efforts to regulate smog and other types of pollution.
The report was completed this year as part of the National Climate Assessment, which is required by Congress every four years. The EPA is one of 13 agencies that must approve the report this month.
The draft report by scientists from those federal agencies says recent decades have been the warmest of the past 1,500 years.
"Many lines of evidence demonstrate that human activities, especially emissions of greenhouse (heat-trapping) gases, are primarily responsible for recent observed climate change," they wrote.
White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders said Tuesday that the "White House will withhold comment on any draft report before its scheduled release date."
Former vice president Al Gore encouraged the Trump administration to release the report. "I call on the Trump Administration to make this Inconvenient report public," he tweeted.
The report concludes that even if humans immediately stopped emitting greenhouse gases, the planet would still feel at least an additional 0.50 degrees  of warming over this century compared with today. Since  an end to greenhouse gas emission is unlikely, the projected actual rise is more than 3 degrees, according to the report.
The numbers are in line with another report, led by University of Washington researcher Adrian Raftery and released last week, that determined there is only a 5% chance that Earth will warm 2degrees or less by the end of this century.
That study was published in the British journal Nature Climate Change.
Michael Oppenheimer, a professor of geoscience at Princeton University who was not involved in the study, told Times the federal report represents the first in-depth analysis of climate change during the Trump administration.
"Scientists will be watching very carefully to see how they handle it," he said. 



NOAA confirms 2016 as the hottest year on reco





The federal government confirmed 2016 as the planet's warmest year on record, according to a report released Thursday by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
The combined influence of long-term global warming and a strong El Nio early in the year led to last year's all-time record heat, NOAA said.
El Nio is a natural warming of Pacific Ocean water. Man-made global warming is caused by greenhouse gases released into the atmosphere from the burning of fossil fuels such as oil, gas and coal.
The amount of carbon dioxide, one of the main greenhouse gases, in the atmosphere climbed to its highest level in 800,000 years, the report found.
The report noted other signs of a warming planet in 2016:
Greenhouse gases were the highest on record.
Sea-surface temperatures were the highest on record.
Global upper ocean heat content was at a near-record high.
Global sea level was the highest on record.
Antarctic had a record low sea ice extent.
Known as the State of the Climate, the annual report is prepared by more than 450 scientists from more than 60 countries and published in conjunction with the American Meteorological Society. It's the most comprehensive annual summary of Earth's climate.
The USA endured 15 separate weather or climate-related disasters last year. At a cost of about $46 billion, it amounted to the second-highest total since 1980, when the records began.
The report came days after President Trump officially informed the United Nations of his plan to remove the United States from the Paris climate agreement, which the government joined in 2016. Trump announced his plan to withdraw on June 1. That agreement aims to keep global temperatures from rising more than 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit) above pre-industrial levels.
A separate study published Thursday found it is "extremely unlikely" that 2014, 2015 and 2016 would have been the warmest consecutive years on record without the influence of human-caused climate change.
That study, published in the peer-reviewed journal Geophysical Research Letters, said the likelihood of seeing three straight record-breaking years without the effects of climate change is "no greater than 0.03%."
"With climate change, this is the kind of thing we would expect to see. And without climate change, we really would not expect to see it," said Michael Mann, a climate scientist at Pennsylvania State University and lead author of the study. 



Don't hype draft studie





Another week of the Trump presidency, another bout of fevered reporting on claims promoted by the career (and holdover) federal employee "resistance." But particularly when it comes to climate change, it seems the ordinary way of doing things is simply too much to ask.
"Climate" has become very big business since Congress first requested quadrennial "National Assessments on Climate Change" in 1990. A big part of that business is government. Another is the news media. Both of which thrive on the end-of-days narrative.
The two met this week to ride the latest national assessment, a draft of which prompted excited reportage and a particularly embarrassing correction by The New York Times.
The first step overboard was to hype a long available draft document as a leak, smuggled from a censorious regime's clutches. It's enough to remind one that drafts generally do not survive required reviews intact.
The first national assessment was due in 1994, but only with the 2000 presidential election looming was the bureaucratic machinery engaged to produce one. Curiously, that voluminous tome heavy with policy implications emerged mere days before the election with then-Vice President Gore on the ballot.
After we at the Competitive Enterprise Institute filed litigation, that document was ultimately stamped with a disclaimer that it had not complied with the Federal Information Quality Act, which sets standards for "influential scientific information."
It seems that the bureaucracy took the wrong lesson from this episode, hyping drafts instead of perfecting final products to survive challenge.
Aggressive campaigns politically weaponizing drafts as authoritative, and publicly available documents as prized "leaks," are reason enough for caution. But measure is a characteristic that the global warming -- now climate change -- debate has lacked for too long.
Last week was yet another reminder we would be well-served by returning to standard procedure, be it by ratifying major international (e.g., climate) commitments as treaties, conducting science, or reporting the news.
Chris Horner is a senior fellow at the Competitive Enterprise Institute. 



Hurricane Harvey will test Trump's leadersh





Presidents using their voices to help America through natural disasters is now standard. It's expected. As natural disasters increase in frequency and size due to climate change and are coupled with wall-to-wall news coverage, presidents must use the bully pulpit to prepare a new generation for this new normal.
President Trump, facing his first historic national disaster, has already started speaking up and saying some of the right things. After the storm, it is also important for the president to go to the scene as soon as practical.  The White House has said he will visit on Tuesday.
Trump's trip will help reassure Texans that the resources of the federal government will be there -- and stay there -- for as long as they are needed in the recovery and rebuilding stages. His visit will also be critical to the morale of relief workers, who need to know that Washington has their backs as the long process unfolds. A presidential visit often brings together officials from different jurisdictions who would not normally be communicating.
Trump appointed Brock Long to lead the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Long is an excellent and experienced choice who knows what buttons to push, and when, to get things done. It is Long's day-to-day responsibility to support local and state efforts to house and feed those who cannot go home and get the lights turned back on, the toilets working, the roads cleared and the schools open.
This is a long process. We are still recovering from Hurricane Katrina 12 years later.
Part of the new normal is also helping prepare our nation for the effects of climate change.  The president needs to talk about redesigning infrastructure in storm-vulnerable areas in ways that allow them to withstand storms, not merely endure them. We need to hear about mitigation: how we can move our building and planning efforts away from the endless damage-then-repair cycle to a reflexive practice of building new and improving existing infrastructure.
We must also educate adults and children alike on how to prepare for and then cope with this new normal. These events traumatize both equally, and parents focusing on getting a home back in order often do not recognize the stresses that impact  kids. Over the past year, I've been working with The Hero in You Foundation to develop a free, interactive system designed  for children, one that offers safety tips and coping devices when it comes to natural disasters.
As Americans have coped with domestic natural disasters, the role of the president has long been one-dimensional.
Today, with larger storms and natural events becoming the new normal, the president has an opportunity to lead in different and more substantive ways.
Today, Trump can and must be the voice of calm leading recovery efforts. But to fully embrace his role, tomorrow Trump must also lead our nation in preparing for the new challenges brought by climate change.
James Lee Witt is a former White House Cabinet member and director of FEMA. He is the CEO of Witt Global Partners. 



Prevent another disaster, act on climate change





LETTERS
My heart goes out to those in Texas who have been displaced, lost their homes or even their lives to Hurricane Harvey. Unfortunately, storms like this one will become much more frequent unless our nation takes significant action on climate change.
It's true that Texas has always had storms (as has the East Coast, and Florida specifically). But it's the frequency and severity that the combination of rising temperatures and sea levels is pushing forward. A solution is needed that bridges the partisan divide.
One such solution is a fee on carbon emissions, collected from the source (such as coal plants) then eventually returned to the community. This is a market- and business-friendly plan quite similar to one being proposed by some in Capitol Hill.
Our children's and grandchildren's future depends on what we do now, so we don't have many more large disasters like Harvey in Texas. Contact your representatives and ask them to support a carbon fee and dividend legislation.
Miriam Kirscht
Ypsilanti, Mich.
FACEBOOK
Just think, if we had a national water grid, we could have turned on the pumps at key collection points and distributed it to reservoirs around the country. Maybe after this, we can think of ways to turn this horrible event into a call for action that just might save billions in future floods, drought and fires.
Edward W. Greenlee
Glad to see President Trump is responding quickly. I'm not a fan of the guy, but when he does something presidential it is nice to see. Just hope he doesn't try to make it all about himself.
Scott Bennett
Houston, you have a problem. But don't worry, we will do all we can to help you.
Luis F. Silva
Right now, getting relief to our friends in Texas is all that matters. Give generously, and show the world what a great country we are. We stand up for each other, that is what makes us great -- always.
Scott Hardy
TWITTER
Our followers shared their thoughts on Hurricane Harvey's passage through Texas and the rescue operations underway.
The water is not forever. Things can be replaced. Human compassion is unending. As long as there's a tomorrow, there's hope.
@FMHilton
The United States Coast Guard, thank you for your unwavering support during this crisis.
@ShaunaJones1
It is not the aftermath yet. Harvey is here for another few days! We all need to be there for victims in whatever way we can. No politics.
@PaintPaperPens
Thanks to all you heroes out there. May you be blessed many more times in life.
@eugene_begay
I hate to see the elderly having to go through this. They are so fragile.
@BreastsR4babies
This is so terrible, people have lost their lives. Please, to the neighboring counties, help supply food and shelter to those affected.
@manavjoshi18
Things like these disasters should tell us that the least of our problems should be us against each other.
@BettyWa95991780
For more, follow @USATOpinion or #tellusatoday. 



Experts postpone arguing climate change; Meteorologists want to have discussion -- once people are safe
USA





While unknown numbers of people are dead, missing or displaced, writing about a potential link between a national tragedy such as Hurricane Harvey and man-made climate change is an understandably touchy subject.
"If you think appropriate time to do so is while floodwaters are continuing to rise, then that opportunism reflects your personal values," tweeted WeatherBell meteorologist Ryan Maue. "What we need right now is an informed, reasoned, intellectual debate on climate change and extreme events."
Another meteorologist, Marshall Shepherd of the University of Georgia, said he had concerns. "I am uncomfortable discussing as a human tragedy unfolds, but when the dust settles, the conversation needs to happen -- and a recent National Academies report on attribution is a good place to start. Attribution studies on Harvey will happen."
Climate change remains a polarizing issue in our divided country.
Whenever a huge weather event such as Harvey occurs, a debate rages in the meteorological community about whether it is appropriate to discuss potential links between climate change and that event.
The report that Shepherd referred to, which was released in 2016, said there is no evidence that the number of tropical cyclones (tropical storms, hurricanes and typhoons) has increased in recent decades as the planet has warmed.
There has been "marginally significant increases in the frequency of Category 4 and 5 storms."
Harvey was a Category 4 hurricane at landfall Friday night, the strongest storm to hit the USA in 12 years.
The report warned that "tropical cyclones are projected to become more intense as the climate warms."
Precipitation in tropical cyclones is likely to increase because of the increased water vapor content of the atmosphere, similarly to other extreme precipitation events, the report said.
The theory goes that a warmer atmosphere would make hurricanes more intense than they would otherwise be. "Climate change is making even heavier rainfall possible," noted John W. Nielsen-Gammon, a Texas A&M University meteorologist and the Texas State Climatologist.
Another expert, Adam Sobel of Columbia University, said that "based on many previous studies of extreme precipitation events, as well as our overall scientific understanding, it is plausible to expect that they (tropical cyclones) will show some amplification due to increased water vapor in a warmer atmosphere."
Sobel said Harvey would have been a huge disaster in Houston with or without global warming. This is because of the specific meteorological situation of Harvey (the positions of the high-pressure systems and the jet stream), and the location of a major city.
"There are ideas about how the meteorological situation could have been influenced by warming, but those are much less robust and well-understood, and at this point, I view it as a natural occurrence by default," Sobel said. 



Did climate change intensify Harvey?




Even as floodwaters raged this week in Texas and Louisiana, so did the debate over the possible link between Hurricane Harvey and man-made climate change.
Climate activists pointed to the historic rainfall and epic flooding as exactly the type of extreme event forecast to occur as the globe warms. Skeptics cited a long list of tropical storms that slammed Texas even before the buildup of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
So who's right?
In some ways, the question is premature, even unseemly, while search and rescue efforts continue. And a definitive answer won't come until scientists conduct post-storm "attribution" studies. In all likelihood, though, the conclusion will be that climate change didn't cause Harvey, but it almost surely made the storm worse.
Harvey produced 40- to 50-inch rainfall totals that left parts of Houston looking like Venice and rivaled snowfall accumulations from blizzards in the Northeast. It was, in fact, the most extreme rainfall event on the continental United States in recorded history.
Such events are consistent with the basic science of climate change: Warmer than normal water temperatures, in places such as the Gulf of Mexico, provide heat energy that fuels the formation and rapid strengthening of tropical storms. Warmer air holds more water vapor, which in turn produces more rainfall. And rising sea levels exacerbate storm surge and inland flooding.
According to the National Climate Assessment, "Heavy downpours are increasing nationally (in recent decades), with the largest increases in the Midwest and Northeast. Increases in extreme precipitation are projected for all U.S. regions."
This isn't just happening in North America.
Even as Harvey riveted the nation's attention this week, the death toll topped 1,000 from unusually severe monsoonal rains half a world away in Bangladesh, India and Nepal.
In the coming days and weeks, expect to hear politicians describe Harvey as an "act of God" that had little or nothing to do with human-induced climate change. Even if climate change is real, they'll add, a serious effort to curb greenhouse gas emissions, through a carbon tax or other means, would be too expensive.
On Wednesday, the private company AccuWeather estimated that Harvey could end up costing $190 billion, making it the priciest natural disaster in U.S. history, equal to the combined cost of Hurricanes Katrina and Sandy.
With that kind of price tag atop a torrent of human misery, the question isn't whether the nation can afford to get serious about global warming. We can't afford not to. 



Irma, another example of what's to come





LETTERS
With Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Harvey and Hurricane Irma -- plus the heat waves and wildfires in the Northwest -- perhaps we're creeping closer to convincing the climate change doubters that human behavior just may be the culprit. For those who believe in science, the needed data are already in. We can change what we do to this planet to stave off our impending bankruptcy by changing our fossil fuel consumption ways. We can move rapidly to renewable energy sources and head off catastrophe.
Citizens' Climate Lobby is reaching out to Republicans as well as Democrats on a one-to-one basis in order to save our economy and more important our lives from the worst of this man-made madness. The best part is that we'll actually save money in the process as fossil fuels are more expensive than the alternatives now.
Mike Caggiano
Citizens' Climate Lobby
San Mateo, Calif.
With Hurricane Irma blowing, part of the strategy is knowing to stay out of her path and avoid her wrath. And hope that we don't lose our power. That in a nutshell would make me sour. Because for better or worse, no power would keep me from sending my letters.
JoAnn Lee Frank
Clearwater, Fla.
FACEBOOK
It is important that people don't go down to Florida and try to help while the hurricane is active. In the near future people can help in person if, and only if, they are part of a well-coordinated effort. Otherwise, they just get in the way.
Meanwhile, one can donate money ahead of time.
Scott Hardy
Gov. Rick Scott said it's imperative to evacuate from Irma's path, but he should've brought in more fuel, food and water.
Christopher Dunn 



Focus on coastal infrastructure
US





The outcry over global warming crowds out and obscures the real issues with hurricanes that should be considered by elected officials at all levels.
The notion that Hurricanes Harvey and Irma should cause President Trump to reconsider withdrawing from the Paris climate treaty and dismantling the Obama climate agenda is preposterous. Did the fact that no hurricanes of Category 3 or above made landfall in the United States from 2006 until this year cause global warming alarmists to reconsider their ruinously expensive and utterly ineffectual policies?
It's no surprise that former vice president Al Gore shamefully tries to exploit every weather disaster, or that many in Congress are  going to use the death and destruction caused by Harvey and Irma to push energy-rationing policies that will do nothing to prevent similar disasters.
The U.N. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's 5th Assessment Report expresses "low confidence" in predicting increases in the intensity and duration of tropical hurricanes and typhoons worldwide over the long term and in predicting a human contribution to any trend.
To take one example, 10 hurricanes of Category 4 or 5 hit the U.S. from 1920 through 1969. From 1970 through this past week, only five hit. Thus, if there is any causal connection, it looks like warming produces fewer major hurricanes.
Although improvements in forecasting, infrastructure, emergency response and building methods have cut fatalities from hurricanes dramatically since more than 6,000 people died from the hurricane in Galveston, Texas, in 1900, many more people are  at risk. And the costs of property destruction have gone up exponentially as beach shacks have been replaced in many areas by large housing tracts.
Rather than wasting hundreds of billions of dollars on reducing greenhouse gas emissions, much smaller amounts should be spent on improving the infrastructure that protects the Gulf and Atlantic coasts.
Myron Ebell is director of the Center for Energy and Environment at the Competitive Enterprise Institute, which has received donations from fossil fuel interests. 



Hurricanes Harvey, Irma and climate disruption: Let's talk
US




This is no time to discuss climate change and deadly hurricanes, Environmental Protection Agency chief Scott Pruitt argued to CNN last week. Such a conversation would be "insensitive" to hurricane victims, he explained.
Actually, this is precisely the time to have that discussion.
In the wake of devastating Hurricanes Irma and Harvey, Americans hunger to know whether global warming -- something they once regarded as a distant threat involving polar bears and melting glaciers -- is a here-and-now part of their daily lives.
Irma became the second Atlantic Category 4 hurricane to strike the U.S. in a single season, the first time in 166 years of weather records. As South Florida braced for the storm, the Republican mayor of Miami, Tomas Regalado, said there was no better occasion to understand the threat that global warming poses to the region's future.
The reality is that there is almost certainly a connection between a warming planet and the growing severity of storms. The only question is to what degree. Climate change doesn't create hurricanes, but scientists largely agree it makes them worse. Sea levels are rising, and this increases storm-related flood damage in coastal cities.
Harvey dropped more than 4feet of water onto part of southeastern Texas, record rain from a storm over the continental U.S., damaging or destroying 100,000 homes in Texas and Louisiana.
Irma spun so powerfully into the Caribbean's Leeward Islands as a Category 5 that it sustained 185-mph winds for 37 hours, longer than ever recorded worldwide.
AccuWeather founder Joel Myers estimates the storms will cost the U.S. $290 billion.
And while the nation is transfixed by the hurricanes, more than 100 wildfires burn across the Northwest, consuming 2 millions acres of forests and grasslands, and threatening to make 2017 the worst ever wildfire season. Scientists see warming temperatures across the West as a contributing factor.
It's small wonder that Americans might look to leadership to connect whatever dots exist between global warming and intensifying natural disasters. But they're met with the moral equivalent of a vacant stare.
Pruitt shushes up the issue even as his agency is cleansing mention of climate change from its website and dismantling Obama-era regulations aimed at curbing greenhouse gases that are gushing into the atmosphere, warming the planet. He acts at the behest of a president who has labeled global warming a hoax, has stocked his administration with climate skeptics, and is pulling America out of the Paris climate accord.
The planet has a problem. The storm-intensification impact of climate change might very well have landed on America's doorstep in recent days in the devastation of the Virgin Islands, wreckage of Florida and flooded homes of Texas. The circumstances cry out for more study and attention, not less.
Now is the time to talk about climate disruption, adapt to it, mitigate it, and take steps to keep it from getting worse. It's not the time for leaders to stick their heads in the sand. 



Calls to address climate change after disasters





LETTERS
In the column "Global warming alarmists shouldn't exploit hurricanes," Myron Ebell claims that talking about the role of climate change amid the death and destruction of Hurricanes Harvey and Irma is insensitive and inappropriate.
However, nothing could be more callously insensitive to future hurricane victims than knowing that America did not take this moment to take lifesaving action to prevent future climate-change driven disasters.
Allan Margolin
New York
FACEBOOK
After years of not having storms hit the U.S., we have a couple of hurricanes. Hurricane Harvey was a tragedy, but its torrential rainfall was due to blocking high pressure systems, not climate change. Whether you believe in climate change or not, a couple of storms hitting the U.S. doesn't mean anything.
Heidi Borden
I think it's clear that warmer water causes stronger hurricanes. It's also clear that the climate is always changing. Lastly, it's clear that pollution is bad for the environment. What is not clear is that climate change is man-made.
Scott Simpson
The global climate change discussion always neglects to offer realistic global climate solutions, assurances of success and their costs.
Mike Smith
I just want to point out that 97% of scientists agree that there is climate change and man is affecting it, and you need to look long and hard at who is funding the other 3%.
Bob Crawford
Instead of politicizing the issue, come up with a solution: Either beef up the infrastructure in areas prone to such disasters if you're going to live there, or stop building cities in those areas. Same goes for California: Don't build neighborhoods on mountain passes where wildfires regularly occur, and you won't have as much death and destruction.
Mike Stevens 



'Scotland's Texas' switches to green after oil bust; Town's workers took a savage hit as jobs went, but area is rife with renewable opportunity
U





This northeastern coastal city was a sleepy college town and fishing port until the 1960s, when the discovery of oil in the North Sea triggered an economic boom that earned it the nickname "Scotland's Texas."
A crash in global oil prices sent the economy into a tailspin, forcing the city of 200,000 to transform itself into a powerhouse for green energy to fight climate change and revive its once booming economy.
"The installation, operation and maintenance of wind is an obvious crossover," said Morag McCorkindale, chief operating officer of the Aberdeen Renewable Energy Group, a consortium of businesses assembled by the city government.
"Some form of long-term decline is seen as inevitable," he said. "We looked at several different diversification opportunities, but the one that took off was the renewables."
One potential beneficiary of the new emphasis is Guy Ingerson, 30, who lost his job as a buyer in the oil industry two years ago. He moved back in with his mother and works retail jobs while campaigning for investment in the renewable energy sector.
"2016 in particular was hard for us," Ingerson said. "You've seen people losing their homes, people having to use food banks and a large amount of people being put in temporary accommodations. People don't have the money to buy things."
That bleak picture is familiar to Michelle Matthew, 43, a former oil rig recruiter who lost her job last year and helps feed the needy at CFINE, a food bank on the city docks where oil supply vessels moor.
"There are people I've spoken to who have worked in the industry, manual laborers who lost their job and struggled to get work, especially older folk," Matthew said. "It gets difficult for them to get back into careers."
The oil crisis hit in mid-2014, when oil prices fell by half and have since hovered around $50 a barrel. Matthew's food bank has limited people to biweekly visits to manage demand.
Unemployment in the city increased 25% during the slump and hit 5.4% in 2016, according to government data. That was about a percentage point higher than the national average.
Luckily for the beleaguered community, the combination of high hills, local skills and strong winds make this corner of Scotland bursting with lucrative opportunities for renewable energy. Scotland has about a quarter of the European Union's potential for wind power, according to the Scottish regional government.
Businesses find ways to turn oil industry equipment into new uses for renewable energy. "The wind turbines now use a jacket structure developed from oil rigs, for example," McCorkindale said.
The innovations in Aberdeen could help other countries develop clean energy, she said. "We're driven by environmental and economic concerns, but we are also developing technology that could help nations out there who are just desperate for power," she said. "People are coming from all over the world to see what we are doing."
Two miles north of Aberdeen's downtown, at the tiny fishing station of Blackdog, Swedish energy company Vattenfall is building the European Offshore Wind Deployment Centre to test deep-sea oil rig technology in the choppy Scottish waters. The project is slated to become one of the largest wind farms in the world.
"As Europe's energy capital, Aberdeen is already well-positioned to transfer more than 40 years of world-class oil and gas expertise into renewable energy -- particularly offshore renewables" said Adam Ezzamel, who oversees the project.
For young people, a shift away from alternating cycles of boom and bust cannot come quick enough.  Niall Ford, 21,  plays music around the city and serves coffee at a youth cafe. It is one of the few businesses doing well in a city center full of empty properties amid glistening granite buildings and grand Victorian streets.
"When you walk around town and see all these places closed down, it is nice to know there is still somewhere you can go and hang out." Ford said. "A lot of people my age looking for more specialized jobs will tend to head out of the city. That seems to be changing. If there is going to be this ebb and flow, we need some momentum to get things happening." 



Smart hurricane fixes are not climate fixes






This is what global warming looks like, opinion pieces quickly declared in Politico and CNN about devastating Hurricane Harvey. A week later, news media and politicians said the same thing about Hurricane Irma.
Jumping the gun on linking disasters to climate change is dangerous. It points us toward policies that will have little to no impact on future devastation.
The science is clear but also nuanced: Climate change will worsen some extreme weather events, and it will improve others.
An excellent peer-reviewed analysis in the journal Weather, Climate and Society by University of Manchester scientists Vladimir Jankovic and David Schultz cites the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the United Nations' global panel of climate change experts, and finds, "Not all extreme weather events will change, nor will some of the changes ... be detectable."
The researchers conclude, "The sound bite of 'climate change means more extreme weather' is a massive oversimplification ... of the science."
Heat waves will increase, but cold waves will decrease. Because many more people die from excessive cold than excessive heat, it is likely that the amount of deaths will decline.
As for hurricanes such as Harvey and Irma: Before Harvey, the USA just ended a record 12-year absence of strong hurricanes. Hurricanes are not hitting the U.S. more -- over the past 120 years, major hurricane landfalls have declined from 7.5 per decade to five per decade.
Storms are causing more damage, but this is entirely explained by more people with more wealth living closer to coasts.
Today more people live in Florida's Dade and Broward counties alone, than lived in all 109 coastal counties from Texas through Virginia in 1930. With more people living in more expensive homes, there are higher damage costs. But adjusted for population and wealth, hurricane damage from 1900-2016 actually decreased.
The problem with blaming a disaster such as Harvey or Irma on global warming is that this tells us the answer should be a global warming answer: carbon cuts. That won't help.
Research shows that the Kyoto Protocol, the first major global deal to cut carbon and rein in temperatures (and, it would follow, help prevent hurricanes) failed to achieve a thing. The Paris climate treaty is on track to cost the globe about $1 trillion to $2 trillion per year for the rest of the century. That is an infuriatingly bad investment. It is little wonder that a Royal Society report concludes that cutting CO2 has "extremely limited potential to reduce future losses."
Effectively tackling hurricane damage in rich countries is almost exclusively about reducing vulnerability, through better zoning (stop building on flood plains and coasts), better building codes, reducing federally subsidized insurance, and allowing for more wetlands to handle flooding. For the world's poor, policies that reduce poverty are the most effective way of building resilience.
This is what responding to hurricanes needs to look like.
Bjorn Lomborg is director of the Copenhagen Consensus Center. 



Undoing Clean Power Plan will be grueling struggle; Once the research and studies are done, bring on the lawyers





The Trump administration's move to start dismantling the Clean Power Plan intended to curb carbon emissions that contribute to global warming will not be a quick process.
EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt's announcement Sunday to a group of coal miners in eastern Kentucky that he plans to sign a proposed rule Tuesday rolling back the Obama-era rule is the first of a number of steps the agency will have to take.
Proposing a rule to undo a regulation takes the same time-consuming, painstaking, research- based, legally defensible process used to adopt the rule targeted for elimination.
"Today's proposed repeal of the Clean Power Plan just begins the battle," David Doniger, a climate change expert with the Natural Resources Defense Council, wrote in a blog Monday. "Pruitt's EPA must hold hearings and take public comment, and issue a final repeal -- with or without a possible replacement. He must respond to all legal, scientific and economic objections raised, including the issues we lay out here."
Then, Doniger said, "we will take Pruitt and his Dirty Power Plan to court."
Rolling back the rule was a major plank of President Trump's campaign last year.
He told friendly crowds in coal-producing states that lifting carbon restrictions would not only keep energy costs affordable but also help revitalize the coal industry and the communities economically ravaged by environmental regulations.
The president has called climate change a "hoax" perpetrated by China to gain a competitive advantage. He vowed to pull out of the Paris climate agreement, the international accord on global warming Obama embraced through his power plan rule.
The budget outline the White House issued this year called for defunding the Clean Power Plan that Obama announced in 2015, which about two dozen states sued to overturn. Oklahoma, where Pruitt served as attorney general before joining the Trump administration, is one of those states.
In Hazard, Ky., Sunday with Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., Pruitt announced his plan to withdraw the rule, saying Washington would no longer play favorites when it comes to energy production.
"When you think about the Clean Power Plan, it wasn't about regulating to make things regular," he said. "It was truly about regulating to pick winners and losers, and they interpreted the best system of emission reduction is generating electricity not using fossil fuels. Rule of law matters. Because rule of law is something that allows you to know what is expected of you. When you have a regulation passed inconsistent with the statute, (it) creates uncertainty. That's what happened with the past administration. We're getting back to the basics of focusing on rule of law and acting on the authority that Congress has given us."
The Clean Power Plan was finalized in 2015, mainly targeting coal-fired power plants that account for nearly 40% of U.S. carbon dioxide emissions. It remains on hold under a Supreme Court stay, pending the outcome of the legal challenge from the states.
The regulation would require power plants to cut harmful emissions compared with 2005 levels. By 2030, the reduction would be 32% for carbon, 90% for sulfur dioxide and 72% for nitrogen oxides.
The rule was developed over years to cut "significant amounts of power plant carbon pollution and the pollutants that cause the soot and smog that harm health, while advancing clean energy innovation, development and deployment and laying the foundation for the long-term strategy needed to tackle the threat of climate change," according to an explanation from Obama's EPA website.
Obama officials touted the rule as key to protecting public health "because carbon pollution comes packaged with other dangerous air pollutants." Having the rule in place, the site said, would prevent 3,600 premature deaths, 1,700 heart attacks, 90,000 asthma attacks and 300,000 missed workdays and school days each year.
"This is a reckless retreat that will hurt our children and grandchildren," said Fred Krupp, president of the Environmental Defense Fund.
State lawsuits contend that Washington does not have the authority to enact such a sweeping measure, which would lead to higher electricity costs and reduced reliability of the nation's power grid.
When the rule was implemented in 2015, New Jersey Commissioner of Environmental Protection Bob Martin called it "unprecedented regulatory overreach (that was) uncommonly cumbersome, difficult and costly to implement, could undermine reliability and would yield insufficient results."
Paul Bailey, president and CEO of the American Coalition for Clean Coal Electricity, applauded the president this year when he signed an executive order directing the EPA to begin the process of reviewing and rescinding the controversial rule.
"The Clean Power Plan is the poster child for regulations that are unnecessarily expensive and would have no meaningful environmental benefit," Bailey said. "We look forward to working with EPA Administrator Pruitt."
Contributing: Doyle Rice 



Climate may make Nemo harder to find
U





The clownfish, made world-famous by the animated movie Finding Nemo, could be harder to find because of global warming, according to a study published Tuesday.
Though coral bleaching is a well-known result of unusually warm ocean water,  sea anemones also can be bleached, which in turn affects the clownfish that live in and around the anemones.
In fact, the fish show much higher stress levels and a dramatic decrease in offspring -- as much as 73% less -- when their home sea anemones are bleached in warmer waters, the study found.
"While no effects on adult anemone survival were observed, the effects of bleaching on reproduction and population demography were likely even greater than demonstrated here," the study's lead author, Suzanne Mills of the French university Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, told the Daily Mail.
She added that the finding is alarming, since man-made stressors and the rate of change in environmental conditions are expected to multiply in the coming decades, "with bleaching and habitat degradation becoming more frequent."
Using the natural El Nio warming phenomenon as a stand-in for what future man-made warming might bring, researchers visited 13 pairs of clownfish and their host anemones in the coral reefs near Moorea Island in French Polynesia from October 2015 to December 2016.
Scientists capitalized on that opportunity to measure the stress and reproduction of the fish before, during and after their host anemone underwent bleaching.
It turned out that the clownfish couples from bleached anemones spawned far less frequently and produced far fewer viable young than those that were not bleached.
This study, which appeared in the peer-reviewed British journal Nature Communications, underscores the numerous cascading effects of warming oceans on the residents of coral reefs.
The clownfish are not an isolated case: In all, 12% of the coastal fish in French Polynesia depend on anemones or corals to feed or to provide protection from predators.
In cases of prolonged bleaching, such as that of the Australian Great Barrier Reef in 2016 and 2017, the renewal of all of these populations could be affected, and with them the stability of the ecosystems, the scientists said. 



500-year floods could hit NYC every five years, study shows





Catastrophic flooding in New York City similar to destruction from Hurricane Sandy is predicted to become far more common in the coming decades, according to a study published Monday.
Rising sea levels from man-made climate change could prompt devastating, 8-foot floods that used to occur once every 500 years to happen once every 5 years by 2030 to 2045, the research said.
"Flooding in the nation's largest city will be much higher and more frequent because sea levels will continue to rise at an accelerating rate," the study said.
Five years ago this month, Sandy barreled into the Northeast, killing dozens of people and swamping parts of New York City under as much as 9 feet of water. In all, the storm caused $70.2 billion in damage.
Anywhere from 5 inches to 11inches of sea-level rise is likely in New York City from 2000 to 2030, the study found.
The researchers based their analysis on multiple models that factored in predictions for sea-level rise and possible changes in the paths of future hurricanes.
Sea level has risen nearly 8inches worldwide since 1880. Here's why: As the Earth's temperature warms, so do the seas. Heat-trapping greenhouse gases cause more land ice -- glaciers and ice sheets -- to melt and water to expand. Warmer water simply takes up more room than cooler water.
Scientists say global warming will be the primary cause of future sea-level rise. The greatest uncertainty is how quickly the massive West Antarctic ice sheet will melt.
The behavior of the planet's major ice sheets, including the West Antarctic ice sheet, under a changing climate is still one of the biggest mysteries to be solved, said study lead author Andra Garner of Rutgers University.
While there remains some question about whether or not the West Antarctic ice sheet could collapse, "we have seen a number of recent studies that indicate that the ice sheets may be melting faster than previously thought," Garner said.
But the study also contained one welcome surprise: Typical storm tracks may be farther off the East Coast in the future, potentially avoiding impact on land.
"Storm surge alone may not become much worse in NYC in the future because the larger surge from these stronger storms is compensated by the fact that storms in future simulations tend to be farther out to sea," she said.
Future changes in sea level and storms would also be smaller if actions to slow climate change are taken, such as the Paris Accord's goal of limiting warming to 3.6 Fahrenheit above pre-industrial levels.
"Human decisions about energy will be important in determining how much the sea rises and thus how much damage we face, and accurate projections of storms will help in minimizing the risks," said Richard Alley, a professor of geosciences at Penn State University and a study co-author.
The study appeared in the peer-reviewed journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
FOR TEXT OF FULL GRAPHIC PLEASE SEE THE ONLINE OR PRINT VERSIONS OF THIS STORY
8-FOOT FLOODING IN NEW YORK CITY
The frequency of major storm-surge flooding will increase in coming decades, according to a new study.
Before 1800
Every 500 years
1970 to 2005
25
2030 to 2045
(Projected)EVERY 500 YEARS
5
SOURCE Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences; Rutgers University 



As globe warms, Trump doubles down on fossil fuel




As if any more evidence were needed that climate change is making extreme heat more likely, take a look at what happened in Southern California last week. On Tuesday at Dodger Stadium, the first-pitch temperature for the opening game of the World Series was a record-shattering 103 degrees.
And how is the Trump administration responding to the  warning signs of global warming? By systematically dismantling the Obama administration's environmental initiatives.
Just five months ago, President Trump broke with nearly 200 other countries in taking the U.S. out of the Paris climate agreement, a stunning move given that the accord regulated nothing, relying only on peer pressure and transparency to limit greenhouse gas emissions.
Now the Trump administration is turning its attention to gutting the Clean Power Plan, the 2015 Obama initiative aimed at curbing greenhouse gases  from energy plants. This latest effort to kill the Clean Power Plan demonstrates sheer contempt for laws governing clean air and the benefits of environmental regulation.
Power plants generate about a third of the 6 billion tons of carbon dioxide America pumps into the atmosphere each year. The Clean Power Plan offered each state a flexible pathway to reducing these emissions by a third. The plan was the next best idea to a market-based carbon tax that would be rebated to consumers.
Yes, it would undoubtedly result in less burning of coal, the dirtiest fuel. But coal was in decline even without new environmental regulations as utilities embraced cleaner natural gas, wind and solar.
U.S. coal mining jobs have fallen to fewer than 77,000, while those in renewable energy have hit 800,000 and keep increasing. Some of the nation's largest power companies this month shrugged off Trump's regulatory rollback, arguing that clean energy has proved to be good business.
The Supreme Court narrowly ruled last year to temporarily block implementation of the plan amid challenges that it represented regulatory overreach. An appellate panel can still reach a decision and should do so.
Regardless, the Environmental Protection Agency remains compelled by law to  reduce carbon dioxide. A 2007 Supreme Court ruling established the gas as a pollutant  subject to reduction if EPA found it a danger to public health. The EPA did that two years later, after reviewing the scientific evidence.
EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt's proposal for dismantling the Clean Power Plan mentions drafting a new method for reducing carbon dioxide. We'll believe that when we see it.
If there's any good news, it's that the Clean Power Plan -- or some similar action to significantly reduce greenhouse gases gushing from the nation's electricity sector -- is likely to survive this effort at sabotage. But that might take years of bureaucratic and legal wrangling, consuming precious time as the planet grows warmer. 



Climate change no longer future threat: Disease, heat hurting us now, study finds





Climate change is already having an extraordinary impact on human health worldwide -- affecting the spread of infectious diseases, exposing millions to air pollution and heat waves and dramatically reducing labor productivity, according to a report released Monday.
"The human symptoms of climate change are unequivocal and potentially irreversible," the report by the British medical journal The Lancet says, and the situation is so serious that significant gains by modern medicine and technology are being undercut.
"The delayed response to climate change over the past 25 years has jeopardized human life and livelihoods," the report says.
While most previous similar studies have covered the potential impact of climate change on future public health problems, The Lancet report goes a step further and illustrates how it is no longer a future threat but a current one.
The direct effects of climate change "result from rising temperatures and changes in the frequency and strength of storms, floods, droughts and heat waves -- with physical and mental health consequences," it says.
For example, from 2000 to 2016, there has been a 46% increase in the number of weather-related disasters, the report notes.
Some of the findings:
Warming is exacerbating the spread of Dengue fever, the world's most rapidly expanding disease. In fact, two types of mosquitoes' ability to spread Dengue globally has increased by 9.4% and 11.1% since the 1950s.
An additional 125 million people around the world were exposed to heat waves each year from 2000 to 2016 (as compared with 1986-2008) and a record 175 million people were exposed to heat waves in 2015.
Rising temperatures have led to a 5.3% fall in labor productivity in the planet's rural areas since 2000, with a dramatic drop of 2% from 2015 to 2016. In 2016, this effectively took more than 920,000 people out of the global workforce.
Global exposure to dangerous levels of air pollution has increased by 11.2% since 1990.
Climate change is also worsening allergies in the United States. For example, Americans faced significantly longer exposure to ragweed pollen in 2016 compared with 1990. 



Climate report won't stop EPA rollback; Government targets Clean Power Plan






WASHINGTON - EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt said a newly released government report that lays most of the blame for the rise of global temperatures on human activity won't deter him from rolling back the Obama-era Clean Power Plan, a rule aimed at combating climate change.
"We're taking the very necessary step to evaluate our authority under the Clean Air Act, and we'll take steps that are required to issue a subsequent rule. That's our focus," Pruitt told USA TODAY on Tuesday. "Does this report have any bearing on that? No, it doesn't. It doesn't impact the withdrawal, and it doesn't impact the replacement."
Last month, the Trump administration began the formal process of dismantling the Clean Power Plan intended to curb carbon emissions that contribute to global warming. Pruitt, who sued to block it as Oklahoma's attorney general, said Congress never gave the Obama administration the authority to implement such a sweeping regulation.
In his first public comments since the Trump administration released the National Climate Assessment on Friday, Pruitt said a decision by the U.S. Supreme Court last year to suspend the regulation until legal challenges are resolved "created great uncertainty" about the regulatory framework.
The EPA is  drafting a replacement rule that will have to be  legally defensible as  environmental groups threaten legal action.
"Our job is to administer statutes," Pruitt said, explaining the limits of what the EPA can do. "We have to act (based) on the authority given to us by Congress."
President Trump has dismissed climate change as a "hoax" perpetrated by the Chinese to gain a competitive edge over the United States. A champion of the coal industry, Trump followed through on his vow to undo the climate change agenda implemented under President Obama by pulling out of the Paris Accord and withdrawing the Clean Power Plan. The EPA, under Pruitt's direction, has been at the forefront of that effort.
David Doniger, a climate change expert with the Natural Resources Defense Council, criticized the EPA administrator for abandoning the power rule, saying the Supreme Court has  recognized the EPA's authority to curb carbon pollution under the Clean Air Act.
"The National Climate Assessment has sounded a five-alarm fire bell, and Scott Pruitt pretends he can't hear it," he said. "The assessment shows unequivocally that carbon pollution is causing dangerous climate change and that our future depends on whether we cut that pollution." 



Germany falters on climate change leadership





After President Trump irresponsibly vowed in May to pull the United States out of the Paris climate agreement, German Chancellor Angela Merkel declared that other world powers would continue fighting the good fight against global warming.
"We are more determined than ever that this be a success," Merkel later said of the accord, which employs voluntary reductions in greenhouse gas emissions to curtail human-caused warming. "We can't wait for the last man on Earth to be convinced by the scientific evidence for climate change."
Indeed, with Nicaragua and Syria now joining the Paris Agreement, the United States would be the world's only holdout among nearly 200 nations. So the leadership of Merkel, as chancellor of the world's fourth largest economy and sixth largest carbon emitter, is paramount if the planet is to rein in rising temperatures.
But German resolve is faltering, and it couldn't come at a worse time.
For a few years, it seemed as if the world's nations -- gushing more than 40 billion tons of carbon dioxide each year into an already overheating atmosphere -- might have peaked on emissions.
Not so. Projections by the Global Carbon Project this month show that after three years of stabilized emissions even as the global economy grew, the output of greenhouse gases will rise by 2% this year and continue increasing in 2018.
This is bad news for the planet. To even begin meeting Paris goals of capping global temperature at no more that 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit) above pre-industrial levels, fossil fuel emissions must not only stabilize but also start falling sharply.
With American leadership sidelined, thanks to a president who once called global warming a hoax, the world needs the "climate chancellor." Former scientist Merkel earned that name for her laser focus on global warming. She was a key architect, first of European Union emission reduction targets and later of the Paris Agreement.
But her own house is not in order, largely because of an addiction to coal burning that also afflicts the U.S., China and other nations.  Germany's carbon dioxide emissions  rose in 2016 and are projected to grow again this year.
Forty percent of Germany's energy is from burning coal, particularly a dirty variant known as lignite easily extracted through open-pit mining. Coal reliance is partly a result of Germany's foolhardy decision to end nuclear power. Berlin is also intimidated by voters in Germany's coal country. So Germany will fall far short of its 2020 goal to reduce emissions by 40% below 1990 levels, a result that an internal government document says will be "a disaster for Germany's international reputation as a climate leader."
At this point, the battle to control global warming needs all the leaders it can get.
Top carbon dioxide emitters (in millions of metric tons, 2016):
China  10,151
U.S.  5,312
India  2,431
Russia  1,635
Japan  1,209
Germany 802
Iran  656
Saudi Arabia 634
South Korea 595
Canada  563
SOURCE Global Carbon Atlas 



World's most northerly town on verge of vanishing; Norwegians fear cataclysm from climate chang





LONGYEARBYEN, Norway - It's freezing, snowing and so far north that the sun won't rise again until March, but the 2,000 residents of the world's most northerly town wish it were much colder.
The weather on Norway's Arctic Circle island of Svalbard is tame in comparison with what it should be, despite the icy breeze that flows in from the sea.
Residents and experts fear this tight-knit community -- where polar bears outnumber people -- is at risk of disappearing because temperatures are rising at an accelerated pace compared with the rest of the world.
"Every single consecutive month has been above average," said Kim Holmn, international director of the Norwegian Polar Institute. "We have tremendous increase in the wintertime temperatures, almost 10 degrees Celsius (18 degrees Fahrenheit) increase over the past 30 years or so."
"Wherever I look, there is change, very obvious change. The snow melts earlier in the spring, the glaciers are diminishing by a foot, 2 feet per year in thickness," Holmn said from the Svalbard Science Center. "It influences life, it influences the landscape, and it influences the people, of course."
Melting permafrost and higher temperatures have caused havoc in recent years, triggering deadly avalanches on the steep mountains that flank the town. Houses have been destroyed, and roads and some areas have been closed or declared unsafe.
Within the past two years, hundreds of residents have been affected, some having to evacuate from their homes.
Mark Sabbatini, 49, a journalist, said he lost his apartment because the melting permafrost created dangerous cracks in the foundation. Sabbatini, who is originally from Alaska, said he is bankrupt.
"We lost the whole value of the apartment, with no insurance compensation or any compensation. We had people who were left broke and had to leave the island, people like me who've been left bankrupt and living off borrowed funds and begging -- literally begging at times -- for just barely enough money to stay alive," Sabbatini said.
Officials cordoned off Sabbatini's home as unsafe for habitation.
The region saw an "amplification" of global warming, Arctic climate expert David Barber of the University of Manitoba told USA TODAY. He warned that projections predict "profound effects on the physics, biology and geochemistry of the Arctic."
The consequences won't be confined to the Arctic. Melting ice sheets from the north have the ability to influence ocean currents that help control the climate farther south.
Uncertainty about global warming and how it could transform Longyearbyen and the surrounding fragile landscape plagues this community.
"There are some people who didn't want to move back into homes that were hit by avalanches," Sabbatini said. "There are folks who are finding all the uncertainty about the town's economic future hard as well -- I'm certainly among them."
Longyearbyen, a former mining town established in 1906 by American businessman John Munro Longyearbyen, has diversified its economy in recent years, profiting from adventurous tourists as well as researchers studying the Arctic.
The changing conditions could put these newer economic developments at risk.
"At Scott Turner Glacier, where we do our ice cave tours, we see from year to year how fast the ice is melting," said Martin Munck, founder of the Green Dog tour company in Svalbard. "If worst-case scenario comes, and there is no snow during winter ... I doubt anyone would like to live here. No tourism and four dark months, with no light-reflecting white snow and no way to go out on tours."
Like Sabbatini, Munck moved to the Arctic island several years ago from his native Denmark.
In fact, the island has no indigenous population, and Longyearbyen is mainly made up of migrants from mainland Norway, neighboring Scandinavian countries and Thailand.
It's a community of misfits from around the world, and it's concerned that people might not want to stay as more parts of town become unsafe and life invariably gets tougher.
There's a clear pride in living in such an isolated and unique part of the world, which helps foster the town's spirit that transforms the dark, winter months into a period of cozy community gatherings and communal projects.
Though people in other far north communities struggle with seasonal affective disorder -- a winter depression from little sunlight -- the illness is rarely seen in Longyearbyen.
There is frustration and anger over expectations that the annual average temperature of Longyearbyen will reach above freezing in the next year or two -- a phenomenon never seen in the town's recorded history.
"Man has changed the atmosphere," Holmn lamented. "There are many people I hear now who are discussing moving down (to mainland Norway). But (Longyearbyen) is still a place that many newcomers find extremely attractive, and many fall in love with it. It is resilient." 

