Capitalism driven by creativity, not greed; It allows you to profit from optimism for better future






This ain't some April Fools' joke. Climate change will improve life.
Why? Consider history. Most people can't envision a hugely better life decades from now. Never have. Consensus forecasts for the far future have always conjured disasters. Same thing now.
America's aging population tanking our economy! Debt bombs! Climate change flooding coastal cities! Terrorists! Social Security's bankruptcy!
Cheer up. History suggests capitalism will transform these into net benefits improving life in unimaginable ways. Even better, you can profit from it.
This ain't horse dung, either. In 1900, the overwhelming consensus was that New York and London would soon be buried in manure from horse-and-buggies linked to explosive population growth. But cars soon rendered that horse puckey.
After that, experts warned the "population bomb" would generate worldwide mass starvation (Neo-Malthusiansim). But thanks to advancing food production, storage and transport technology, famine faded -- despite global population fully doubling since then. Outside war-torn or hugely corrupt nations, starvation is mostly history.
This ain't some Russian conspiracy. Recall that Cold War? Nuclear U.S.S.R? Mushroom cloud phobia, when my generation repeatedly practiced air raid drills by diving under school desks? (How were those desks gonna' save me?)
Despite Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev famously saying "We will bury you" in 1956, legendary diplomat Vernon Walters detailed how capitalism's growth would allow the West to easily afford military technology that the Soviets couldn't -- and finally bury them financially. Robert Noyce and Gordon Moore's metal oxide semiconductor technology largely finished that job.
As for the air, since I first started voting, Pittsburgh's snow isn't  gray/black like back then. Los Angeles air is breathable again.
And consider the huge advances in health technology. I had polio in 1953. Progress in medicine has destroyed that era's worst health ravages, and changes keep coming, extending life spans. Cancer deaths have dropped more than 25% since 1990.
Creative folk, through capitalism, keep inventing cool new stuff, endlessly, and will continue to.
Fears that we would pump our oil wells dry or depend on foreign crude reigned for decades. AKA Peak Oil.
No more. First came fracking (an energy extraction technique), then came water pollution phobia from fracking. Yet waterless fracking is on deck now. Technology through capitalism rendered all that hot air. And hot air brings us back to climate change.
What I've described, and so much more, was done by creative capitalists to profit from problems. Climate change is a huge potential problem. So why shouldn't we believe greedy, conniving capitalists will conjure wildly crazy sounding schemes, most of which fail, but some few of which transform our climate equations? And all to make a buck! Those buggerish, bad guys!
Crazy, you say?
Is it not crazier to believe capitalism's creative continuum simply stops? Those other megafears, above, will also generate net benefits. Do I know how? Not a clue. Will it happen? Faster than the nick of time.
And you can profit from it without knowing what or who does it. Often, the biggest winners from technology aren't technologists but creative dreamer-users spinning that tech into something unbelievably useful.
Scan your home. Count the gizmos using Noyce's semiconductors. Big-screen TVs, cars, coffeemaker, thermostat, microwave and kids' toys.
Where most fear monster long-term risks lay unimaginable opportunities. Evil capitalists will do the heaviest lifting. They've done it since capitalism's birth to reap megaprofits. New firms sprout. Old ones adapt to grow. Failures die. Stock investors reap the rewards -- even passively through cheap Standard & Poor's 500 index funds.
Oh, by the way: Stock brokerage commissions fell more than 95% during my career. (My online critics mistakenly claim I sell stocks. Never have, but I do believe in stocks.)
Many call capitalism greed-driven. That's too cynical. It's creativity-driven. It lets you profit from optimism for a better future.
Profits from problems. 





To save its ice, hockey is thinking green






Hockey features glove saves, skate saves and stick saves -- though these are nothing, really, next to the most audacious save on which the NHL has set its sights:
Save the planet.
That may sound like a joke. What does hockey have to do with environmental policy? Well, for one thing, the game is played on ice. And frozen ponds, where so many of the league's players learned to skate, are in trouble. The average length of the skating season may shrink by one-third in eastern Canada and by 20% in western Canada in coming decades.
That's according to research in the NHL's 2018 sustainability report, out Wednesday morning. The report assesses the league's own environmental impact and its commitment to fighting climate change.
Allen Hershkowitz, founding director and chairman of the Board of Sport and Sustainability International, credits the NHL for using that term -- "climate change" -- after the Trump administration announced in June that the U.S. would walk away from the 195-nation Paris climate accord and Environmental Protection Agency Administrator Scott Pruitt said carbon dioxide is not a primary contributor to global warming.
"It would be dishonest not to acknowledge that the report is coming out when the world is facing the most challenging political climate in the United States as it relates to climate change policies," says Hershkowitz, whose non-governmental organization has members in more than 50 countries.
Leagues prefer to stay far away from controversy  so they don't alienate  fans. Just  look at the NFL, where players kneeling for the national anthem last season caused considerable outcry.
Hershkowitz says climate change is about science, not politics. Even so, does the NHL worry about disaffecting  fans who may think otherwise?
"What I would say is, when we do this work, we try to do it as apolitically as possible," says Omar Mitchell, NHL vice president for corporate social responsibility. "Because at the end of the day, as our commissioner would say, this is the right thing to do."
More than a dozen federal agencies issued a report late last year that said humans are the dominant cause of a rise in global temperatures that has led to the warmest period in the history of civilization. That report said global average temperatures have increased 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit over the past 115 years.
That's a period of time that encompasses the rise of hockey. The NHL celebrated its centennial in 2017 -- and it wants to be around for its bicentennial.
"How we think about our environment and how we think about sustainability is going to be a critical element in making sure our sport has a future," says Kim Davis, NHL executive vice president of social impact, growth initiatives and legislative affairs.
The NHL's report is voluntary. "And what gives the report its teeth is that we did a carbon inventory" of the league's own environmental impact, Mitchell says. "Hockey is a very energy-intensive sport. Our analysis shows about 66% of our carbon footprint is attributed to energy usage to create an ice sheet. So what we are trying to do is to promote innovations that will lower energy consumption within our buildings."
The league launched its NHL Green initiative in 2010 and released its first sustainability report in 2014. Among highlights of this second report:
The NHL reduced energy consumption 1% from fiscal year 2014 to fiscal year 2016.
The NHL decreased water consumption 7% from fiscal year 2015 to fiscal year 2016.
The NHL reduced CO2 emissions by 2% year-over-year from fiscal year 2014 to fiscal year 2016.
"The single most important thing the NHL has done is measure, and refine the measurement protocol, for professional sports," Hershkowitz says. "It can't be understated how important that is, (measuring) energy use, water use and waste generation at arenas that you don't own and that you occupy for only a fraction of the time."
Scott Jenkins is general manager of Mercedes-Benz Stadium in Atlanta and chairman of the Green Sports Alliance, which includes nearly 500 sports teams and venues from 15 sports leagues in 14 countries. He says sports teams are in favorable positions to influence the broader culture on environmental concerns and to show that being environmentally sensitive is good for business.
"We can't afford to live on the sidelines," Jenkins says. "We have to get in the game."
Which brings us back to frozen ponds. The NHL's sustainability report tells of RinkWatch, which encourages citizens to monitor outdoor rinks and ponds in their neighborhoods. The initiative was launched by researchers at Wilfrid Laurier University in Waterloo, Ontario, in 2013. More than 1,400 rinks and ponds are tracked to help scientists  study the long-term effects of climate change.
"If you trace (hockey) back to the sort of humble beginnings, particularly in Canada, it all goes back to frozen ponds," Davis says. "A lot of NHL players grew up playing hockey outdoors. It's such a critical part of the game, and it's important that access remains available for future generations." 



Student marchers ponder next step; Young people want their presence felt at polls






They walked out of classes. They rallied in streets across the nation for the March for Our Lives in powerful ways. They have the attention of millions. Now what?
The student-led movement forged in Parkland, Fla., after the high school shooting that took 17 lives is remarkable, organized and fierce -- but not rare. Endless lists of groups have protested, marched, rallied, cried and pleaded for changes, whether  for gun laws, immigration, women's reproductive rights or climate change.
The question is whether these young people who call themselves "the mass-shooting generation" will fade into the background of the debate over gun control or be the leading charge in changing the country's policies.
Many of the Parkland students at the march in Washington on Saturday made it clear one of the next revolutions would be at the polls.
"We are going to make this the voting issue," said David Hogg, a Marjory Stoneman Douglas student and an organizer of the march.
"We are going to take this to every election, to every state and every city. We are going to make sure the best people get in our elections to run not as politicians, but as Americans."
Leaders of past movements said it's going to be an uphill battle to translate the #NeverAgain movement into significant changes. A lot will revolve around local efforts, keeping pressure on lawmakers and having a clear message moving forward.
Jaclyn Corin, one of the core members of the group, said she knows it will be difficult and called for the crowds Saturday in Washington  to vote. She and the other student speakers shared stories of surviving gun violence and seeing it rip apart their communities and families.
Corin told TODAY the students aren't "backing down." She said their successes have been astonishing, and they're committed to finishing what they started.
"Our target is the November elections, and we know we definitely have to keep pushing forward to then," she said. "This whole thing has taken off into a much bigger thing. We are starting a non-profit and want to continue to advocate for gun control, reforms and voter education."
Focusing on elections and being "relentless" was a part of what made previous gun control measures happen, said Richard Aborn, a former president of the Brady Center, which advocates gun control.
In the 1990s, Aborn worked to  push for the federal assault weapons ban and the Brady Bill, which created a waiting period for some gun purchases and the establishment of a federal background checks system.
He said that back then, getting support from either political party was difficult, and the National Rifle Association was the Goliath it still is today. Over the years, the NRA has slowed and dismantled gun control efforts it said would hurt the Second Amendment and gun owners across the USA.
The group filed a lawsuit in Florida shortly after the state passed a sweeping bill after the Parkland shooting. It included gun control measures, including one that would increase the age to 21 to purchase firearms.
The NRA said the legislation violated the constitutional rights of millions of 18- to 20-year-olds and called it "political eyewash."
Aborn said the Parkland students are resilient and have grit, noting that the group has all the elements of a successful movement. But, he said, the students must remain focused on the cities where members of Congress are from, which can help thrust  gun violence into the spotlight of this year's elections.
He said that although the march in D.C. captured headlines, it's local efforts that could lead to meaningful change. He said one of the keys will be making gun control a vote-changing debate for Americans and the younger generation. Only then, he said, will there be sweeping changes on policies.
"What happens with movements like this is you get great peaks of enthusiasm, then it dissipates," Aborn said. "You have to keep up the pressure and also keep things active at the local level with very specific goals, then you have to publicize all the wins, whether it's a key vote or successful efforts in a small town."
Many in the crowd Saturday said they knew the march wouldn't be enough.
Joyce Hylton, a retired high school teacher, came with her college roommate and husband. She said she has watched gun violence  rip the country apart for decades and "couldn't just stand back anymore and wait for someone" to push for changes.
"It's time for all us to take responsibility and make sure these shootings stop," Hylton said. She hoped the momentum from the rally would keep  supporters on course for the November elections.
Keeping track of small wins keeps up spirits because it's going to be a long and tough road before there are shifts in the gun control debate, said Meira Levinson, a Harvard University education professor who focuses on youth empowerment and civic education.
She said the Parkland students seem to have a good chance  at a sustained campaign because they are diverse and joining forces with others, such as minorities in cities that have been heavily affected by gun violence.
"Everyone can recognize themselves in these kids, and that is really crossing boundaries," Levinson said. 

iz Dufour/TODAY NETWORK



Climate change could spur immigration from Mexico; Crop-crippling drought may drive people north across American border






The number of people moving from Mexico to the has dropped sharply over the past decade. But researchers said a new force could drive more people across the U.S.-Mexican border in the coming decades: climate change.
As global temperatures climb, dry regions have become more susceptible to drought. That includes northern Mexico, where increasingly intense dry spells are likely to reduce crop yields in  agriculture-dependent areas, potentially giving people more reason to seek better opportunities in the USA.
Researchers who study the link between global warming and migration said many factors contribute to a person or family's decision to move to another country, climate change often playing a supporting role. Several studies have singled out climate change as a potentially significant driver of U.S.-Mexican migration.
"It's never any one thing that causes people to move," said Michael Oppenheimer, a Princeton University climate scientist who's researched climate-driven migration. "But we have a lot of evidence from many different countries that relatively modest variations in the climate, that could be short-term or long-term, do cause people to move."
It's hard to say how many people could be pushed across the U.S.-Mexican border by climate change.
A study in 2010 co-authored by Oppenheimer found that up to 6.7 million people could come to the from Mexico as a result of global warming by 2080. A study in 2016 from researchers at the University of California-Davis projected 41,000 additional immigrants over the next 50 years as a result of climate change.
What those studies and others have in common is a finding that high temperatures and reduced rainfall -- conditions that are becoming more common -- have contributed to waves of migration from Mexico to the USA.
"More hot days in rural Mexico will increase migration out of rural Mexico, including to the U.S.," said Ed Taylor, a development economist at UC-Davis and co-author of the  study in 2016.
Valerie Mueller, a development economist at Arizona State University,  said there's a general consensus that rising temperatures have contributed to people moving away from rural, agricultural areas in developing countries -- usually to other rural areas and cities within their own countries but sometimes across national borders.
"A lot of it is being driven either by vulnerability to crop loss or wage laborers losing their jobs because farmers can no long afford to hire them," Mueller said.
Mueller said  more people moving from Mexico to the could be a good thing economically. Farmers in California's Central Valley have faced a shortage of laborers as legal and illegal immigration from Mexico has declined.
Mueller said it's not clear how much of a difference climate change will make to overall migration levels, considering the relatively low number of immigrants from Mexico in the past few years.
In 2015, the Pew Research Center reported that since the end of the Great Recession, more Mexicans had left the than had moved here. Analysts attributed that drop to several factors, including improved economic conditions in Mexico relative to the USA, lower birth rates in Mexico and tougher enforcement of U.S. immigration laws under President Obama.
In light of climate change, Mueller said, "it's not so clear whether these increases in immigration flows are going to lead to a mass exodus of people into the United States."
Susan Martin, an emeritus professor at Georgetown University and an expert in international migration,  said any climate-driven migration from Mexico  would be relatively small. She said the Mexican government has improved its social safety net, giving agricultural areas greater insurance against the risk of  crop losses. She said the may be more likely to see climate-driven migration from Central America, where more extreme weather adds to the instability created by violence and poverty. 



Science of arctic cold and global warming




Just as TODAY's article "It's cold outside, but that doesn't mean climate change isn't real" says: Yes, it's hard to explain why a blast of arctic cold in the eastern U.S. does not contradict the reality of global warming (or climate change).
Social psychologists tell us how people react viscerally to their immediate surroundings, and how their preconceptions and values inform the way they process information -- especially the unwanted kind.
So I agree that it's unrealistic to expect ordinary Americans to grasp the complexities of a scientific issue like climate change and support wise policy decisions.
So ... isn't that why we have scientists?
Rick Knight
Citizens' Climate Lobby
Brookfield, Ill.
There is natural climate change and man-made climate change. Both are real. Both are different -- quite different, actually.
The drivers of natural climate change are different. For example, things like the Milankovitch cycle.
Are people really ignorant enough to think that because something has a natural cause it can't also have a man-made cause?
Terry Mayer
When will all this global warming ever stop, so it will warm up already?
Gary Swank
Too much warming and you throw off the salt content in the ocean. Thus, preventing heat from moving from the equator, causing the north and south to get a lot colder. Rather ironic.
James Jones
Like President Trump said on Twitter: "Perhaps we could use a little bit of that good old global warming ... Bundle up!"
Gil Fidler 



After year of disasters, Gore still has hope for climate; The world is on cusp of revolution, he says






Millions of lives in Florida, Puerto Rico, Texas and elsewhere were upended by hurricanes, and tens of thousands of Californians lost their homes or businesses in wildfires in 2017.
Last year, President Trump mocked climate science on Twitter and rejected an international climate change agreement,  and his administration began undoing dozens of regulations meant to slow the rise in global temperatures.
Despite all that, Al Gore is optimistic.
In an interview with TODAY at the Palm Springs International Film Festival, which screened his new film, An Inconvenient Sequel: Truth to Power, this week, Gore pointed to what he called signs of progress.
India plans to sell only electric vehicles by 2030 and generate staggering amounts of solar and wind power over the next five years. China is launching a national carbon trading program to limit pollution. Norway's $1 trillion sovereign wealth fund -- the world's biggest investment fund -- plans to sell its $37billion worth of shares in oil and gas companies.
Driven by rapidly falling prices of solar and wind power and by forward-looking governments in countries such as India and China, the world has finally reached a technological tipping point in the battle against climate change, Gore said. The world is at the beginning of "a sustainability revolution that has the magnitude of the Industrial Revolution but the speed of the digital revolution," the former vice president said.
"We saw it with the marriage equality movement. We saw it earlier with the civil rights movement. All these movements have bumped along very slowly with an agonizingly slow pace, and then all of a sudden there's an inflection, and people say, 'Oh, I get it,'" Gore said. "We're at that point now with efforts to solve the climate crisis."
Federal scientists reported Monday that 2017 marked America's third-hottest year on record and contained 16 separate weather and climate disasters that each caused losses exceeding $1billion, including Hurricanes Harvey, Irma and Maria and the California wildfires. The damage from those disasters totaled a record-breaking $306 billion. Though scientists don't attribute all those disasters to human-caused climate change, they said human influence probably played a role in worsening many of them.
Gore compared watching the nightly news to "a nature hike through the Book of Revelation."
"People are connecting the dots on their own," he said.
Gore's new film says hardly anything about Trump, even though its release came six months after he took office. Instead, Gore and the filmmakers focus on reasons for hope: the growth of solar and wind power and the Paris climate agreement signed by nearly every country in 2015.
Gore said the Trump presidency has been "less consequential than I feared it would be." He had been concerned other countries would follow Trump's lead in exiting the Paris deal.
"The entire rest of the world stood up and said, 'We're still in the Paris agreement.' Some countries doubled down on it. California and quite a few other states said, 'We're still in.' Hundreds of cities, thousands of businesses, and the U.S. is now going to exceed its commitments under the Paris agreement regardless of Trump."
Still, Gore said he's painfully aware that more must be done to avoid the worst consequences of climate change.
Earth is nearly 2 degrees Fahrenheit warmer than it was before the Industrial Revolution, when people started pumping large amounts of heat-trapping gases into the atmosphere. The Paris agreement set a goal of limiting the warming to no more than 3.6 degrees, but scientists fear that's slipping out of reach. Staying under that limit was based on countries committing to more ambitious targets every few years, which may be more difficult without the United States at the table.
"I don't think it's ever too late to recapture its position of leadership, but a great deal of damage has been done to the reputation of the U.S. in the rest of the world," Gore said. "And many countries are now beginning to plan as if they can't rely on U.S. leadership.
"I don't think it's too late. But I think we need a new president," he said.
Gore said one election isn't enough to turn the tide on climate change. He harshly criticized the "cottage industry of climate denial" and said the United States is "unique in all the nations of the world in having this persistent climate denial movement that is financed by the large carbon polluters." 

oe Meyers/The Desert Sun



A look at key changes in the Doomsday Clock since 1991




A look at key changes in the Doomsday Clock since 1991
1991  11:43  The Cold War ends. U.S. and Russia reduce nuclear arsenals.
1998  11:51
2007  11:55   Climate change presents dire challenge to humanity.
2015  11:57
2018  11:58   Fears grow worldwide about a U.S.-North Korean conflict.
SOURCE Bulletin of Atomic Scientists 



Climate change threatens half of U.S. military sites worldwide






Military leaders are sounding another alarm about  climate change, saying in a new report that half of U.S. military sites already have been affected by floods, wildfires, droughts and other weather extremes that are exacerbated by rising global temperatures.
After a request from Congress, the Defense Department studied climate risks to all 3,500 U.S. military sites around the world. It found that nearly 800 had been affected by droughts, 350 by extreme temperatures, 225 by storm surge-related flooding and more than 200 by wildfires, among other  events.
Climate scientists say those types of extreme weather events have  become more common as global temperatures increase. Sea levels are rising, storms are getting more intense, dry regions are getting drier and fire seasons are getting longer, research shows.
The Defense Department's report released last week says that the military "looks at climate through the lens of its mission," and that "changes in climate affect national security in several ways."
"Our warfighters require bases from which to deploy, on which to train, or to live when they are not deployed. If extreme weather makes our critical facilities unusable or necessitate costly or manpower-intensive work-arounds, that is an unacceptable impact," says the report, which was prepared by the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics.
That message is at odds with the Trump administration's rejection of climate change as a serious problem. Federal agencies are rolling back regulations that limit the emission of planet-warming gases  such as carbon dioxide, and President Trump announced plans last year to withdraw the U.S. from the Paris Agreement, an international accord to fight climate change.
The administration didn't discuss climate  in its National Security Strategy, released in December, nor in its National Defense Strategy, released in January -- the first time in a decade that the document ignored climate change.
But military leaders -- including Trump's Defense secretary, James Mattis -- continue to describe climate change as a security threat, which has  the ability not only to hamper military operations but also to stir up instability in already-unstable parts of the world.
Mattis told Congress during his confirmation hearing that global warming is "impacting stability in areas of the world where our troops are operating today." Researchers, for instance, have found that a severe drought helped kindle the Syrian civil war.
The Defense Department's new report lists several examples of extreme weather damaging military sites, including flooding from Hurricane Sandy at West Point Military Reservation in New York and Naval Weapons Station Earle in New Jersey.
The report also describes erosion of a rock seawall that protects an airstrip at Cape Lisburne Long Range Radar Station in northwest Alaska, which required  a $47 million replacement project.
The report has some shortcomings, said David Titley, a retired Navy rear admiral and former top official at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration who now leads the Center for Solutions to Weather and Climate Risk at Penn State University.
For one thing, Titley said, the report doesn't examine trends over time. Military officials were asked survey questions about  the effects of weather on their bases over the  past 30 years, meaning it's unclear how much of an effect climate change has had.
"I am not surprised weather impacts have a big impact on (military) operations. I've known that ever since I've been in the Navy," Titley said.
Still, Titley said, the report is a strong baseline for future studies. "This really gets to the crux of the matter, which is readiness," he  said.  "If our bases are under increasing threat from extreme weather, then that will impair readiness." 

lake Sell/AP



Can Winter Olympics beat climate change?; Snow sports and family traditions are at stake





Does your family have a "thing"? A particular hobby that you bond over, passing traditions, jokes and maybe even equipment down from one generation to the next? For my family, it's skiing. I was only 2 when my dad, who ran a ski school, started teaching me to ski. Now that I have a daughter of my own, I can't wait for her to learn to walk -- so I can teach her to ski!
But by the time she grows up, and has kids of her own to teach to ski at entirely too young an age (as per family tradition), there could be a whole lot less snow around. If we do not find the courage to kick our fossil fuel addiction and transition to clean energy, we will warm the atmosphere to the extent that areas typically covered in white all winter long could see only sporadic snow.
For example, a study released last year found that by 2050, when my daughter will hopefully be putting my grandchildren on skis, the snow season across the could be cut in half. By 2090, when her children are raising their children, there could be as much as an 80% reduction in ski season length (costing the winter sports and recreation industry hundreds of millions of dollars).
The story is the same across the globe. Recent analysis of 21 cities that have held the Winter Olympics found that nearly half won't be reliably cold enough to host them again by mid-century. Though snow machines have already proved able to take up some of nature's slack in keeping runs covered, before long many past host cities just won't be cold enough to sustain the snow and ice necessary to host again.
That's not only a loss for those of us who carry on family traditions inseparable from the snow, but also a huge blow to the economies of so many mountain towns. Nationwide, the snow sports economy generates $73billion annually. From lift tickets to hotel rooms to restaurant meals, our rural mountain economies rely on snow as their currency.
Fortunately, a melted future is by no means what has to happen. Though it will take a whole lot of effort, limiting warming to the 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit of the Paris climate agreement is still a possibility. Wind and solar power are getting cheaper and cheaper. Scientists are constantly improving how long batteries to store renewable energy can hold a charge, how quickly they can be recharged, and how cheaply they can be purchased.
There is no escape from using fossil fuels in our lives today; they are woven into the fabric of modern society. We each inherently have a carbon footprint, and even though reducing that footprint is a good step forward, it's not enough. We need to change the system. When we turn on our lights, we need that energy to come from clean sources, created without fossil fuels that cause so much carbon pollution.
The solutions are here. We just need to embrace them.
That means voting for politicians who will increase funds for clean energy and energy efficiency -- not propose drastic cuts. Research shows the vast majority of Americans want the government to invest in green energy and to limit our carbon pollution. But as long as our elected officials continue to prioritize coal, oil and gas, our emissions will continue to grow and our winters will continue to shrink.
And if you don't love winter as much as I do, then I'll just remind you that along with fewer snow days, we'll also be getting more extreme heat. For every degree Celsius (1.8 degree Fahrenheit) the planet warms, we could see as many as 34 additional days of heat waves per season.
And without a decent snowpack, especially in the West, our rivers and reservoirs will store less and less water that we so desperately need in the warmer months.
A world where everyone's sweating for an extra month or two, and with far fewer days to chill out on the slopes, is not the inheritance I want for my daughter. What about you?
Steven Nyman, an alpine ski racer on the U.S. Ski Team and a three-time Olympian, lives and trains in Park City, Utah. He was named to the 2018 Olympic team but won't be competing in Pyeongchang, South Korea, due to an injury late last month. 



Lyft plans to fight global warming with carbon credits
U





SAN FRANCISCO - Cars and trucks contribute nearly a third of the nation's greenhouse gases, according to the Environmental Protection Agency.
If that pains you, Lyft is offering a salve. Starting Thursday, the pollution produced by every vehicle on Lyft's platform will be offset by a self-imposed carbon tax, co-founders John Zimmer and Logan Green announced in a blog post on Medium.
That payment is expected to run "in the millions" of dollars this year and will go toward a variety of U.S.-based initiatives working to reduce levels of carbon dioxide scientists say play a key role in global warming, Lyft President John Zimmer told TODAY.
"This isn't just about buying (carbon) credits to feel good about yourself, it's about investing in projects that otherwise wouldn't happen, whether it's a wind farm in Oklahoma or reducing emissions from an auto parts plant in Michigan," he said. "And this is just the beginning."
Carbon credits, also referred to as carbon offset, are a tool that allows companies that produce greenhouse gases to offset that carbon dioxide production by financially supporting projects that emit very low or no emissions.
While Lyft remains a distant second to Uber in the ride-hailing game, the company has made  gains -- largely by presenting itself as a feel-good outfit with a conscience -- since Uber's annus horribilis last year, which saw co-founder Travis Kalanick removed in the wake of cultural and business scandals.
For example, Lyft has a feature that allows riders to round up their fare to the nearest dollar and donate the difference to charity. And the company always has allowed riders to tip drivers; Uber added that feature last year as part of an  initiative aimed at repairing its often fractious relationship with drivers.
Last fall, Lyft hit 500 million rides total, which compares to Uber's 5 billion to date. But Uber has a presence in dozens of countries, while Lyft has focused its efforts largely on the U.S., with recent inroads into Canada.
Dubbed the Green Cities Initiative, Lyft's carbon credit move comes on the heels of the company joining We Are Still In, a group started last year by former New York mayor Michael Bloomberg and California Gov. Jerry Brown that has rallied 2,600 signatories who support continuing to meet environmental goals laid out by the Paris Climate Accord. President Trump pulled the U.S. out of the accord last year.
Currently, EPA chief Scott Pruitt is working to roll back Obama-era tighter mileage standards in favor of automakers. "Irregardless of politics, we'd have done this (tax), but it does highlight the importance of taking action," Zimmer said. "We want to show that companies can do good, financially, by their employees and for their customers."
In the blog post, Zimmer and Green pay tribute to early environmentalist mentors -- including Ecology of Commerce author Paul Hawken, who recently joined Lyft as an advisor on green matters -- and noted that a third-party administrator, 3Degrees, will be allocating Lyft's millions.
Green said the carbon tax would be levied based on mileage driven and not cars on the road. According to the EPA, burning 1 gallon of gasoline creates roughly 20 pounds of carbon dioxide.
While Zimmer was keen to talk about Lyft's ramped-up focus on leveraging its growing platform to try and offset some of the negatives created by transportation, he also weighed in on two hot-button topics facing his industry.
After a self-driving Uber car killed a pedestrian in Arizona last month, debates have surfaced over whether autonomous technology should continue to be tested on public roads.
"That was a tragedy, and everyone should take pause," Zimmer said. "Self-driving cars have the promise of cutting into the roughly 100 deaths that happen every day in the U.S., but it's not appropriate to bring tech to market before it's ready." 



Islands worldwide may become uninhabitable within decades





This isn't the sort of beachfront property you'd want to own.
By the mid-21st century, many low-lying atoll islands around the world could become uninhabitable because of sea-level rise from human-caused climate change, according to a study published Wednesday.
The rising seas would lead to frequent flooding, lack of fresh water and widespread damage to island infrastructure.
Most of the planet's low-lying islands are in the Indian or Pacific Oceans.
Island chains, including uninhabited areas in northwestern Hawaii, would be susceptible to  ocean flooding.
The study focused on Roi-Namur on Kwajalein Atoll, one of the Marshall Islands.
"The tipping point when potable groundwater on the majority of atoll islands will be unavailable is projected to be reached no later than the middle of the 21st century," said Curt Storlazzi, a geologist with the U.S. Geological Survey and lead author of the  report.
Sea-level rise, one of the clearest signals of global warming, is driven by warming and expanding ocean water, as well as the melting of mountain glaciers, ice caps and the  Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets.
Seas have risen nearly 8 inches worldwide since 1880, but unlike water in a bathtub, they don't rise evenly. Scientists said global warming will be the primary cause. The greatest uncertainty is how quickly the massive West Antarctic ice sheet would melt.
Previous studies had said these islands would see only small impacts until at least the end of the 21st century. Those studies did not take into account wave-driven overwash nor its impact on freshwater availability.
The study  appeared in the journal Science Advances. 

eter Swarzenski/U.S. Geological Survey



THE SINGLE-FAMILY HOME: Endangered species; Emblem of the American dream faces an uncertain future





"A man is not a whole and complete man," Walt Whitman wrote in 1856, "unless he owns a house and the ground it stands on." A nation of such homeowners, Franklin Roosevelt said in World War II, was "unconquerable." In the Cold War, the builder William Levitt said no householder could be a communist -- "he has too much to do."  The single-family house and yard, on a street of other houses and yards, helped make America something new in the world: a nation of suburban homeowners.  Cape or ranch, colonial or contemporary, the house -- more even than the car, the skyscraper or the Hollywood movie -- is the American idol.
But now, demographic and meteorological changes are calling the future of the single-family home into question.
Its critics say that the house is too sprawling in a time of climate change, too expensive in a time of economic inequality and just too boring for many city-dwelling Millennials, that more of us should live closer together in neighborhoods near mass transit with less need to drive and more chance to interact.
Its defenders say the single-family house is what most people want, if not what professional planners, social reformers and academics -- the elites! -- want for them. And they say  construction of new houses on empty land at the edge of the metropolis offers working and middle-class people the best shot at the American dream.
Construction of single-family homes,  eclipsed by multifamily starts after the housing market crash a decade ago, regained primacy two years ago.  Home builders' confidence hasn't been as consistently high since 2005. Home ownership, which had declined for years, has stabilized around 64%.
But the image of the house is clouded by Houston's experience with Harvey; by the need in California and elsewhere to both cut greenhouse gas emissions and build more housing; and by the Millennial generation's looming decision about where to settle.
In Houston, famed for its rapid construction of relatively affordable, market-rate single-family houses,  Hurricane Harvey has raised questions about the wisdom of paving so much of the floodplain and drainage areas.
In California, where prices of single-family houses  are drifting beyond the reach of the middle class, a proposed law would promote multifamily housing and discourage sprawl, effectively declaring YIMBY -- yes in my backyard.
Across the nation,  the Millennial generation, the largest in history, faces two questions: Do you want a single-family house? And can you afford one?
House, sweet house
If Whitman was the poet of the single-family house, its polemicist is Joel Kotkin, a former East Coast newspaperman who now lives and teaches college in suburban Southern California. Three years ago he founded a Houston-based think tank, the Center for Opportunity Urbanism, to extol the low-regulation, low-tax school of real estate development.
He says the future of American cities can be summed up in five letters: T-e-x-a-s. Last year, Houston and Dallas were No. 1 and 2 nationally in single-family building permits with about 35,000 each; the next closest metro was Atlanta at 25,000.
Kotkin says that although people love its space, privacy and convenience, the house is under attack as "an environmental hazard" by left-wingers who'd take us back, he says sarcastically, to "the good old days when we were herded together in tenements." He calls renters who are unable to afford a house "the new serf class."
Kotkin and his COU colleagues  disdain many of the building and land use rules that, according to the National Association of Home Builders, add $80,000 to the average house price.
He likes sprawl, which he says signifies a healthy housing market. Construction of houses on empty, relatively cheap land at the edge of a metro area  keeps down prices throughout the rest of the metro market.
Only sprawl, he says, can deliver the American dream.
Harvey and the house
Houston is the nation's largest city with no municipal zoning. The county in which it sits has logged the nation's highest population growth in eight of the past nine years. The metro motto could be "When in doubt, build."
As a result, much of greater Houston -- an area three times the size of greater London with half the population -- has been paved over, compromising the region's capacity to absorb storm rain.
Houstonians, Chronicle columnist Lisa Falkenberg wrote after Harvey, "have come to tolerate and even expect ... policies that favor developer profits over public safety." An installment in a Chronicle series on the flooding said Houston's laissez-faire development formula "suddenly had a death toll in the dozens and a price tag in the billons." Harvey, it concluded, "was Houston's reckoning."
"This is an inflection point for Houston," says Bill Fulton, director of Rice University's Kinder Institute for Urban Research. "In the future, home construction will still be less expensive here than on the coasts. But it will be more expensive than it used to be."
My old California home
Once, the single-family house was as much a symbol of California as the golden bear. But its precarious status these days is illustrated by state Senate Bill 827, sponsored by a senator from San Francisco named Scott Wiener.
Wiener's bill is an aggressive attempt to address two problems: high housing prices and vehicular air pollution. The measure would override local zoning to allow developers to erect taller and larger housing structures near mass transit stations and stops. Buildings four to eight stories high could be constructed in neighborhoods zoned single-family residential, and such houses could be torn down and replaced with several smaller structures or one larger one.
The bill is notable for its opposition -- a coalition of neighborhood preservationists, civil rights groups and environmentalists who  say it's too heavy-handed.
The Millennial moment
A few years ago, many planners and developers said Millennials were different. They preferred dense, walkable, urban neighborhoods to the suburbs where they grew up and accepted less living space as part of the bargain.
But even then, surveys showed that while Millennials might be happy apartment dwellers at the moment, in the future they saw themselves in a suburban house -- especially if they had kids.
And now, with median age of the Millennial generation around 28 -- two years from the traditionally median age of first time home buyers -- the problem is supply and price.
This year work will start on about 900,000 houses. But the projected demand for such homes is  1.2 million to 1.3million, according to the homebuilders association.
And fewer of those built are starter models. From 2002 to 2009, 44% of new single family homes were $200,000 or less. Last year  it was 13%.
In a survey by Mayflower movers, two in five 18-to-35-year-olds said they'd moved to a city with no intention to settle there, but to move after a period of time, often to find more affordable housing. The term for such vagabonds: "vacation movers."
Last of the builders
By the start of the 20th century, the single-family house had replaced the row house as the home to which most Americans aspired. Builders like Bill Pulte made that hope a reality.
When World War II ended, little housing of any type had been built since the early 1930s. Veterans were sleeping in Quonset huts and converted trolleys, on relatives' couches and fire escapes. By 1947, 6 million families were living doubled up.
Pulte started building in 1950, the summer after he graduated from high school, with a bungalow on the outskirts of Detroit.
Inspired by Levitt, who was building thousands of houses at Levittown on Long Island, and by Henry Ford, the master of assembly line production, Pulte built more and larger houses. He developed his first subdivision in 1959. By 1995, Pulte was the nation's largest homebuilder.
When Pulte died last month at 85, he was among the last living members of the generation of builders who created the single-family suburb. He'd also lived long enough to see their creation called into question. 





Hurricane Harvey's record rain tied directly to warmer Gulf
US





Record warm water in the Gulf of Mexico fueled the historic rainfall from Hurricane Harvey last August, according to a  study that  found man-made climate change was partly to blame.
More than 5 feet of rain  from Harvey in southeast Texas triggered  flooding that killed 89 people, caused more than $126 billion in damage, displaced more than 30,000 people and damaged or destroyed more than 200,000 homes and businesses.
The heat in the Gulf last August, just before Hurricane Harvey, was the highest ever recorded, scientists said.
"We show, for the first time, that the volume of rain over land corresponds to the amount of water evaporated from the unusually warm ocean," said lead author Kevin Trenberth of the National Center for Atmospheric Research. Seawater in the Gulf was nearly 86 degrees, which helped boost Harvey's rainfall.
In other words, according to The Washington Post's Capital Weather Gang, the study found that the amount of heat stored in the ocean is directly related to how much rain a storm can unload. Harvey's rain was the most a single storm had dumped on the in recorded history.
"Warmer oceans increased the risk of greater hurricane intensity and duration," Trenberth said. One of the main ingredients in hurricane formation is seawater of at least 80 degrees.
"Harvey could not have produced so much rain without human-induced climate change," the study said.
More troubling is that the record warm water  could be a harbinger of future storms. "As climate change continues to heat the oceans, we can expect more supercharged storms like Harvey," Trenberth said. 



Baobabs, Africa's oldest trees, dying; Scientists suspect climate change as killer
U





Baobab trees -- an icon of the African continent and the heart of many traditional remedies and folklore -- are dying, and scientists are trying to understand why.
A study published Monday found eight of the 13 oldest trees in Africa have died over the past decade, and the authors suggest climate change may affect the ability of the baobab to survive.
"The deaths of the majority of the oldest and largest African baobabs over the past 12 years is an event of an unprecedented magnitude," the study authors said. "These deaths were not caused by an epidemic, and there has also been a rapid increase in the apparently natural deaths of many other mature baobabs."
Baobabs -- also known as "dead-rat" trees because of the shape of their fruit -- are among the world's most distinctive plants, featuring stout, massive, branchless trunks that can look like pillars.
The study's lead author, Adrian Patrut, a chemist at Romania's Babe-Bolyai University, told NPR that "such a disastrous decline is very unexpected. It's a strange feeling, because these are trees which may live for 2,000 years or more, and we see that they're dying one after another during our lifetime. It's statistically very unlikely."
Using radiocarbon dating, the researchers analyzed more than 60 of the largest and potentially oldest baobab trees in Africa from 2005 to 2017. They were surprised that most of the oldest and biggest died within those 12 years.
Overall, five of the six largest baobabs either died or their oldest parts significantly deteriorated.
Man-made climate change is a likely suspect, scientists said. Increased temperature and drought are the primary threats, Patrut told BBC News. Researchers said further study is necessary to support or refute that idea.
Thomas Lovejoy, an environmental scientist at George Mason University, who was not involved in the study, told The Washington Post that "something obviously is going on in almost selectively affecting the largest and oldest. I do think climate is a likely culprit, but they don't actually present any evidence of how climate is changing where these ancient trees occur."
Whatever the cause, these mysterious deaths will have a big impact on the southern African landscape. In addition to shade, the tree's bark, roots, seeds and fruit are food sources for many animals, according to Science magazine. 

eorges Gobet/AFP/Getty Images



Kavanaugh feels for those he rules against; Conservative nominee's rulings show openness






WASHINGTON - Supreme Court nominee Brett Kavanaugh sought to strike down the District of Columbia's gun registration requirement and ban on semi-automatic rifles in 2011. But he said, "I greatly respect the motivation" behind the laws.
The following year, he opposed a ruling that allowed the Environmental Protection Agency to regulate greenhouse gases, though he acknowledged that "EPA issued these regulations to help address global warming, a policy issue of major long-term significance to the United States."
Later that year, Kavanaugh upheld South Carolina's photo identification law because it allowed for exceptions. "In some states ... minorities disproportionately lack photo IDs," he wrote for a three-judge panel. "That racial gap has exacerbated concerns about voter ID laws."
And in 2015, he sided in part with a religious nonprofit seeking to avoid a federal mandate that it provide insurance coverage for birth control. At the same time, he said, "the government has a compelling interest in facilitating access to contraception."
From gun control to birth control, environmental protection to voting rights, President Donald Trump's nominee for the Supreme Court has been a reliable conservative vote on its steppingstone, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.
At the same time, Kavanaugh has displayed a degree of understanding that often borders on empathy for the policy goals of those he rules against.
"As one who was born here, grew up in this community in the late 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s, and has lived and worked in this area almost all of his life, I am acutely aware of the gun, drug, and gang violence that has plagued all of us," he wrote in the Washington, D.C., gun control case. "My view on how to analyze the constitutional question here under the relevant Supreme Court precedents is not to say that I think certain gun registration laws or laws regulating semi-automatic guns are necessarily a bad idea as a matter of policy."
That ability to see issues from other points of view has given some liberals hope that if he wins confirmation, Kavanaugh could be an honest broker on the court and not a knee-jerk addition to the conservative majority.
Akhil Reed Amar, a liberal constitutional scholar who taught Kavanaugh at Yale Law School, says the 53-year-old judge's "combination of smarts, constitutional knowledge and openness make him clearly superior."
"He goes out of his way to make sure he's hearing both sides," Amar says.
To be sure, most of Kavanaugh's roughly 300 opinions, concurrences and dissents came out as conservatives hoped. That's why he was nominated to succeed retiring Justice Anthony Kennedy, whose own brand of conservatism veered left on key social issues such as abortion and gay rights.
But unlike the late Justice Antonin Scalia, he often seeks to appease rather than aggravate the other side.
Kavanaugh's dissent last year in a case involving an undocumented teenager in federal custody who wanted an abortion is a case in point. He could have joined Judge Karen Henderson, who argued that the 17-year-old lacked any right to an abortion because of the "fundamental difference between citizenship and illegal presence in our country."
Instead, he merely argued that more time should have been allowed for a sponsor to come forward, so that the girl could get an abortion without government involvement. 

anuel Balce Ceneta/AP



Democrats work hard to stay united






The California Democratic Party endorsed Sen. Kevin de Leon because of his substantial achievements on climate change, gun control and immigration, including our  sanctuary state law. Let's be clear: Our dedicated and hardworking activists cast an affirmative vote for a candidate. The only rejection is of President Donald Trump's corrupt and compromised regime.
Sen. Dianne Feinstein is a formidable leader, enjoying national respect and prestige over four terms in the U.S.  Senate. The media are trying hard to push the tired Democrats-divided storyline because of our endorsement. This sensationalized oversimplification sells newspapers, but it doesn't paint a real picture.
Here's the reality. We have worked hard to stay united, including my call for candidates to not even seek the endorsement. California Democrats are united in leading the resistance to Trump. We are united in our commitment to defeating Trump's stooges in Congress, winning our third consecutive sweep of statewide races and a supermajority in our legislature. We are united to fight for progress on immigration, climate change, affordable housing and other key issues.
We will work our hearts out for our candidates, starting with those running against Trump enablers in Congress. We will work hard to energize millennials, rural voters and people of color to support our entire ticket, starting with de Leon and gubernatorial candidate Gavin Newsom.
The media are stuck in their, pre-Trump mindset of left versus right and red versus blue. But voters see Trump's collusion with Russia. They see his flagrant corruption. They are revolted by the dangerous forces he has unleashed,  particularly the justification of kidnapping children and locking them in cages. When they see what's happening to our country, their first concern isn't right versus left. It's right versus wrong. And those voters will be well served by Kevin de Leon as their champion in the Senate. Just as they have been well served by Dianne Feinstein.
Eric C. Bauman is the chair of the California Democratic Party. 



Climate change linked to suicides; Study suggests rates could rise with temps
U





Rising temperatures linked to human-caused climate change could lead to increasing suicide rates in the United States and Mexico, a study suggested Monday.
By comparing historical temperature and suicide data going back decades, researchers found a strong correlation between warm weather and increased suicides, according to a report published in Nature Climate Change, a peer-reviewed British journal.
Researchers have known for centuries that conflict and violence tend to peak during warmer months.
"Now we see that in addition to hurting others, some individuals hurt themselves," said Solomon Hsiang, study co-author from the University of California-Berkeley. "It appears that heat profoundly affects the human mind and how we decide to inflict harm."
The study found climate change could lead to 9,000 to 44,000 additional suicides across the United States and Mexico by 2050.
"This may be the first decisive evidence that climate change will have a substantial effect on mental health in the United States and Mexico, with tragic human costs," Hsiang said.
The study found suicide rates increase 0.7 percent in U.S. counties for each 1.8-degree  increase in monthly average temperature.
"The thousands of additional suicides that are likely to occur as a result of unmitigated climate change are not just a number, they represent tragic losses for families across the country," said lead author Marshall Burke of Stanford University.
In the United States, suicides claim nearly 45,000 lives a year, twice the number of homicides, and they are the 10th-leading cause of death. Suicide rates in the U.S. have risen nearly 30percent since 1999, according to a report in June from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Globally, about 800,000 people die as a result of suicide every year, the World Health Organization said.
"Suicide is one of the leading causes of death globally, and suicide rates in the U.S. have risen dramatically over the last 15 years," Burke said. "So better understanding the causes of suicide is a public health priority."
Mental health experts caution other factors should be considered when studying suicide rates.
Medication, prescription costs and  the economy are key parts of the equation, said Daniel  Reidenberg, executive director of Suicide Awareness Voices of Education, a non-profit organization.
"If in fact suicide rates were truly corresponding to the temperature, would that suggest that we keep people who are suicidal in cooler climates or temperature-controlled settings, and that would reduce the risk of their death?" Reidenberg said.
Study co-author Burke said hotter temperatures are "clearly not the only, nor the most important, risk factor for suicide."
"But our findings suggest that warming can have a surprisingly large impact on suicide risk, and this matters for both our understanding of mental health as well as for what we should expect as temperatures continue to warm," he said.
The  past three years have been the globe's hottest on record, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said, just as carbon dioxide levels are at their highest in 800,000 years.
A study last year in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences found that "warming temperature trends over the last three decades have already been responsible for over 59,000 suicides throughout India."
Looking at social media, the authors found higher monthly temperatures also were associated with an increased use of "depressive language" on Twitter. Looking at more than a half-billion Twitter posts, they found that tweets contain language such as "lonely," "trapped" or "suicidal" more often during hot spells.
Daniel J. Reidenberg, executive director of Suicide Awareness Voices of Education, a non-profit organization dedicated to preventing suicide, raised some red flags about the study. He said  the authors should have considered other variables such as medication, prescription costs and economic factors. 



EPA plan would prolong life of coal plants; Opponents say they'll sue to thwart proposal






WASHINGTON - Aging coal-fired power plants could get a new lease on life under an industry-friendly proposal by the Trump administration that would replace the Clean Power Plan, former President Barack Obama's signature plan to confront climate change.
Unveiled Tuesday, the Affordable Clean Energy (ACE) Rule would give states broad latitude  in how they would regulate power  plants' greenhouse gas emissions that contribute to global warming as well as other pollutants, such as smog, soot and mercury.
"Today we are fulfilling the president's agenda. We are proposing a (plan) that promotes affordable, clean and reliable energy for all Americans," Acting EPA Administrator Andrew Wheeler told reporters Tuesday, adding that the Clean Power Plan "exceeded the agency's legal authority."
But by the EPA's own admission, the proposal could lead to more than 1,000 premature deaths a year, a statistic opponents pounced on.
"With today's Dirty Power Plan proposal, the Trump EPA once again proves that it cares more about extending the lives of old coal plants rather than saving the lives of the American people," said Conrad Schneider, advocacy director of the Clean Air Task Force.
Environmental groups and some states vowed to sue to stop the plan's implementation, just as opponents of Obama's Clean Power Plan have done.
In a tweet, California Gov. Jerry Brown called the EPA proposal "a declaration of war against America and all of humanity" that will not go unanswered.
The Clean Power Plan rule was finalized in 2015, mainly targeting coal-fired power plants that account for nearly 40 percent of U.S. carbon dioxide emissions. But it remains on hold under a Supreme Court stay pending the outcome of a legal challenge from  states.
In October, then-EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt rolled it back, carrying out a promise by Trump to push an energy agenda that encouraged the use of coal. The president, who has called global warming "a hoax" perpetrated by China to gain a competitive edge, wrote in a tweet May 18 that "we have ended the war on coal."
Aimed squarely at coal-fired power plants, Obama's proposal would require existing power plants to cut harmful emissions  based on 2005 levels. By 2030, the reduction would be 32 percent for carbon, 90 percent for sulfur dioxide and 72 percent for nitrogen oxides.
Wheeler called the Obama plan "overly prescriptive and burdensome" and said it would have led to "double-digit" increases in electricity prices in up to 40 states, Wheeler told reporters on a conference call. EPA officials on the same call said consumer prices will fall slightly under the Trump plan by 2025.
According to the EPA, the Trump plan would:
Define the "best system of emission reduction" for existing power plants as on-site, heat-rate efficiency improvements.
Provide states with a list of "candidate technologies" that can be used to establish standards of performance and be incorporated into their state plans.
Update the New Source Review permitting program to further encourage "efficiency improvements" at existing power plants.
Give  "states adequate time and flexibility" to develop their own plans.
Jim Matheson, CEO of the National Rural Electric Cooperative Association, which  serves 42 million consumers nationwide, supports the plan.
"The proposed rule appears to provide electric cooperatives with a more achievable plan that adheres to EPA's historic approach to using the Clean Air Act," he said in a statement. "This is necessary to provide electric co-ops the certainty and flexibility they need to meet their consumer-members' local energy needs."
But environmental groups decried the plan as a sop to the coal industry at the expense of public health and the  reality of climate change.
Gina McCarthy, former EPA administrator under Obama and an architect of the Clean Power Plan, called the Trump administration's move "a huge gimme to coal-fired power plants" by giving them a "free pass" to increase not just carbon emissions but other unhealthy pollutants as well.
"They are continuing to play to their base, and they are following industry's playbook step by step," she told reporters. "This is all about coal at all costs." 

im Cole/AP



Science is not settled on global climate
TOD




Matt Vespa, Townhall.com: 
"Global warming has consistently been ranked the least important issue with voters for years. This is an Acela Corridor concern, where rich liberals can whine and advocate about reducing carbon emission with zero economic blowback. For rural America, millions of Americans will be out of work. No job retraining will do any good ... and economic growth and activity could be severely curtailed. The job losses would be staggering. We're the Saudi Arabia of coal, with enough to power our country and our economy for centuries. We're at our most industrialized in the U.S. and air quality couldn't be better. Sorry, the science is not settled on this matter. We're going to hear about extreme weather in the coming days -- and how President Donald Trump is some semi-God who conjured it out of thin air, or something -- but we had the calmest hurricane season in 30 years back in 2013. In that same year, we experienced the quietest tornado season in 60 years." 

Ned Barnett, The (Raleigh, North Carolina) News & Observer: 

"As Hurricane Florence bears down on the Carolinas this week, Trump (said), 'We are absolutely and totally prepared.' He may be right about federal emergency readiness -- we'll see -- but he's plainly wrong about the nation's broader preparation for weather calamities. This president is doing the opposite of preparing. In the face of climate change that is clearly contributing to more powerful storms, droughts, floods, rising seas levels and wildfires, Trump is dropping the nation's guard. ... In the next week or so, the president may be in North Carolina to survey the wreckage from Florence. But such damage in the future will be intensified by his own big wind that's upending efforts to avert climate change. Call it Hurricane Donald." 

Miami Herald, editorial: 

"When it comes to extreme weather, Trump is complicit. ... With depressingly ironic timing, the Trump administration announced Tuesday a plan to roll back federal rules on methane, a potent greenhouse gas that is the main component in natural gas. Drillers and transporters of the fuel were supposed to be more careful about letting it waft into the atmosphere, which is nothing more than rank resource waste that also harms the environment. The Trump administration has now attacked all three pillars of President Barack Obama's climate-change plan. The president has cemented the GOP's legacy as one of reaction and reality denial. Sadly, few in his party appear to care." 



Fear of Florence should fuel action on climate
TOD




An alien intelligence visiting our planet this week would be shocked by how people can at once be fearful and feckless about the consequences of a warming planet. 
While there is no evidence that climate change creates any given storm -- such as Hurricane Florence, ruthlessly bearing down on the East Coast -- there is no scientific debate that the planet is warming and that seas are rising due in part to melting ice sheets. 

And there is reasonably strong scientific consensus that warmer air holds more water vapor, producing more rain, and that higher ocean temperatures fuel a cyclone's power. In addition, it's indisputable that rising sea levels worsen one crucial destructive element of any hurricane -- the storm surge of sea water that sweeps inland wreaking havoc. 

Despite this growing body of knowledge, and even as Florence makes its terrifying debut, news arrived this week that the Trump administration is seeking to ease drilling-industry restrictions and allow even more heat-trapping gases into the atmosphere. 

Even as the nation braces for what could be one of the most destructive manifestations of a warming planet -- a hurricane of potentially historic proportions -- policies are being drafted that could render the planet even more vulnerable. 

Isn't this the definition of insanity? 

The rule changes proposed by the Environmental Protection Agency, first reported this week by The New York Times, would weaken Obama-era restrictions aimed at preventing oil- and gas-drilling operations from leaking methane, a pollutant 25 times more effective than carbon dioxide at trapping heat in the atmosphere. 

President Donald Trump has labeled climate change a hoax, and easing methane restrictions is his latest effort to dismantle President Barack Obama's framework for fighting climate change. After announcing that the United States would withdraw from the Paris climate accord, Trump has proposed rolling back vehicle fuel-efficiency standards and junking Obama's Clean Power Plan for cutting greenhouse gas emissions from electricity generating plants. 

All of this is being done under the mantle of deregulation. Easing restrictions on the methane leaking into the atmosphere will save the oil and gas industry $484 million by 2025, according to an EPA estimate. 

But consider this: 

Three of the five costliest hurricanes in U.S. history were last year (Harvey, Irma and Maria) and caused a combined $265 billion in damage. 

Irma and Harvey represented the first time in 166 years of record-keeping that two Category 4 hurricanes made U.S. landfall in one year. 

Harvey dumped more than 60inches in Texas, and two studies have determined that global warming hiked that rainfall by 15%-38%. 

Forecasters now fear that Florence could prove to be the Harvey of the East Coast. 

And there's the price in lives lost. Maria killed at least 3,000 people in Puerto Rico, earning it a place as America's second deadliest storm since a hurricane killed 8,000 to 12,000 people in Galveston, Texas, in 1900. 

Surveys this year show that three out of four Americans now believe that global warming is real, and large majorities agree that humans are at least partially responsible with the burning of fossil fuels and the release of heat-trapping gases into the atmosphere. 

As the fury of Hurricane Florence descends on the southeastern USA, its ferocity juiced by warm waters and a warming atmosphere, Americans may begin questioning the wisdom of policies that can only make such catastrophes worse. 

OAA via Getty Images



Humans have affected hurricanes' power





North Atlantic hurricanes have intensified since the 1970s, and scientists are increasingly able to attribute aspects of individual hurricanes to human-caused climate change. Satellite data indicate the percentage of hurricanes reaching Category 4 or 5 has roughly doubled since the '70s. 
Recent studies concluded storm surge from Hurricane Sandy in 2012 affected 11 percent more homes because of sea level rise, caused primarily by human activity. Likewise, Hurricane Harvey's record-breaking rainfall was made three times more likely by human-caused warming. Research also suggests global warming is contributing to weather patterns like the high-pressure ridges that caused Harvey and Florence to stall after making landfall. 

Hurricanes have and will always occur. But global warming is loading the dice, making intense storms more likely. 

Kristina Dahl, senior climate scientist 

Union of Concerned Scientists 

Oakland, Calif. 


   FACEBOOK 


More people and more valuable infrastructure in the way of storms equal more fatalities and damage. Flooding is made worse by increased runoff due to more pavement and impervious surfaces. 

Yes, the damage from Hurricane Florence is unfortunate, but Hurricanes Hazel, Hugo and other past storms in the Carolinas have been a lot more intense. Today's mainstream news media want to make every hurricane, or even snowstorm, into an example of climate change and the biggest, baddest storm ever. Storms are just daily variations in weather; just get used to it. 

Tom Haxby 

No single weather event can be directly attributed to global warming, it's just weather -- but patterns are a different story. We're seeing  increases in the amount of storms and their intensities. 

Julio Rivera Ayala 



Smile   things aren't as bad as your brain thinks they are






The view from the freeway near my Los Angeles home was apocalyptic this summer. Thick black clouds from a nearby fire stretched across the sky, and ashes covered vehicles as we were all brought to a standstill by a multicar accident. It was also close to 110 degrees, and I thought of the firefighters in their heavy gear working tirelessly to get California's many wildfires under control. The world has gone to hell in a hand basket, I found myself muttering.
Whether you live near a natural disaster or not, it's easy to have a pessimistic outlook: politics, global warming, harassment, prejudice and famine all litter the news. Unstable countries have nuclear weapons, and Russia is meddling with democracy. The national deficit is off the charts, and Flint, Michigan, still has dirty water.  We don't know our neighbors anymore, and crime seems to be on the rise.
At least that is the narrative most of us believe. A Pew research study from last year showed the majority of Americans feel that life in the United States was better 50 years ago. Psychologist Steven Pinker looked at similar studies around the world and found the majority of Earth's inhabitants feel the world is getting worse.
Yet these feelings simply do not mesh with reality. The world is far better than it was at any other time in history. Consider some of the facts. The average life expectancy is way up, and child mortality is down. Famine and hunger rates have collapsed. Economic output per person is up across the world and extreme poverty is down. It was reported recently that more than half of the world's population is now middle class or wealthier. Inequality has decreased around the globe. There are fewer wars happening now than at any point in human history, and nations are trending in the direction of democracy.
Yes, there is less violence in the world: Violence is down worldwide, including bullying, rape and domestic abuse. This is even true for notoriously brutal places such as Mexico, where violence rates are a fifth of what they were a century ago. To top it off, our quality of life is better. We spend more time with our children, less time in the office and less time doing housework than at any point in the last 50 years, and even the poorest of us have more spending money. You can get the data on all of these facts in Steven Pinker's well-researched new book "Enlightenment Now."
If the world is objectively better than ever, why are we so pessimistic? Part of the reason has to do with our brains and a quirk called the "availability bias." When we see negative news, we don't put it in context. Instead, a report of a murder in the town next door makes us think  killings are common, even though we can only name one example. Another factor is the brain's bias toward negativity. Bad things loom larger in our minds than good things. We evolved that way because paying attention to  dangers is necessary for survival.
News gets some of the blame: The news is partially to blame, as objective measures of sentiment show that print and television news coverage has become more negative in the past few decades, even as  actual news grows increasingly more positive. This isn't surprising. After all, journalists are humans who are subject to their own bias toward keeping the attention of their audiences. A headline proclaiming "the world is doing great" probably won't keep viewers tuned in through the next commercial break in the same way that "the dangers lurking outside" surely will.
Fascinatingly, while people generally believe the world is falling apart, they also believe their own lives will be better in the future. When researchers ask people if they will be better off in five years, most say yes. We overestimate our own future happiness, while simultaneously believing the world will generally be worse in the future. In the end, optimism will always drive the human condition.
As an extreme and unapologetic optimist, I'm all for that bias. But I'd like to see us extend a little bit of that optimism to the world around us. Heck, we don't even have to be optimistic; we just have to consider the facts. The world is objectively better than it was 10, 50 or 100 years ago. We should never stop working to improve it, but even on a bad news day, we need to keep things in perspective.
Jeff Stibel is the former CEO of Web.com and vice chairman of Dun & Bradstreet, a partner of Bryant Stibel and an entrepreneur who also happens to be a brain scientist. He is the TODAY bestselling author of "Breakpoint" and "Wired for Thought." Follow him on Twitter at @stibel.
The views and opinions expressed in this column are the author's and do not necessarily reflect those of TODAY. 



Opposing view: 'A costly, unfair and ineffective tax'





Voters in Washington state are asking themselves an important question: Should one of the cleanest, greenest states in the nation saddle itself with billions in new energy taxes for a badly written measure that will have no impact on climate change?
Initiative 1631 is a deeply flawed, unfairly drafted energy tax that would force Washington families, small businesses, farmers and consumers to pay higher costs for gasoline, heating fuels, electricity and natural gas as well as for goods and services.
It would impose a $15 fee per ton on certain carbon emissions beginning in 2020, increasing by $2 each year plus inflation, quadrupling within 15 years, with no limit on how high it could go.
A state analysis shows that the initiative  would increase energy taxes by $2.3 billion in the first five years alone.
This tax would especially hurt low-income and fixed-income households, seniors and working families who can least afford to pay more. The fact that the measure includes language purporting to mitigate these impacts is further evidence of the regressive nature of the proposal. It would also damage our state's economy.
A study by National Economic Research Associates consulting firm found that the $30 billion in new taxes collected over 15 years would cost the equivalent of 21,300 jobs and reduce the gross state product by $5.3 billion. Gasoline prices would increase by 13cents per gallon in the first year alone, increasing annually with no cap, adding up to 59 cents more per gallon within 15 years.
All told, the firm estimates total costs per household at $440 in 2020, increasing to $990 by 2035.
Finally, the initiative provides no specific spending plan, too little accountability and no requirements to reduce greenhouse gases. It gives an unelected board of political appointees a blank check to spend billions as they choose, without real legislative oversight or accountability to voters.
The initiative is a costly, unfair and ineffective tax that would damage our state's economy and would block the pathway to meaningful climate policy. On Tuesday, Washingtonians should reject 1631.
Bob Edwards is past president of the Association of Washington Cities, the Port of Seattle Board of Commissioners and the Puget Sound Regional Council. 



Democrats will push on climate change; Policies could carry risk for leaders of new House
TOD





WASHINGTON - Capitol Hill Democrats who soon will run the House of Representatives are prioritizing climate change nearly a decade after their attempts to slow global warming helped whisk them out of power.
Party leaders vowed to hold hearings on President Donald Trump's aggressive efforts to undo Obama-era climate rules and demanded internal documents on administration decisions to scale back restrictions on fossil fuels that contribute to global warming.
Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., who is vying to regain her role as House speaker, said she planned to revive a special congressional panel designed to examine climate change. The Select Committee on Energy Independence & Global Warming was shelved after Republicans took over the House in 2010.
That urgency grew after the release Friday of a dire government report that climate change poses an increasing risk to the planet in the form of extreme weather, worsening health conditions, the spread of new diseases, increasing drought and famine and economic decline.
Trump said Monday that he's not buying the National Climate Assessment's warning that the effects of global warming could reduce the nation's GDP by as much as 10 percent by 2100.
"I don't believe it," he said when asked about the conclusions of the report, which was written by dozens of top scientists from 13 federal agencies in the Trump administration.
Though they won back the House during the midterm elections by campaigning largely on health care, Democrats got the backing of environmental groups that poured tens of millions of dollars into their campaigns and registered liberal voters.
The quandary for the party leaders when they take back power Jan. 3 is how aggressively to pursue an issue that contributed to the tea party wave that fueled the Republican takeover of the House in 2010. How prepared are they to address  arguments that "alarmist" climate change policies would  increase energy prices and reduce consumer choice? How willing are they to take on a president who was elected  two years ago on an America First platform that promised to "bring back coal" as part of an energy independence agenda?
For now, Democrats are content to build a case through fierce congressional oversight and the power to subpoena administration records, knowing that any major legislation they could pass probably would be vetoed by the president even if it got past the Republican-controlled Senate.
Lawmakers led by incoming Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Frank Pallone, D-N.J., demanded documents related to Environmental Protection Agency proposals to let states regulate their power plants, freeze fuel-efficiency standards for cars and light trucks and roll back requirements on the power industry to check and repair methane leaks.
"The tragic and human and financial costs of unchecked climate change are high and increasing fast, and unfortunately the administration's actions for the last two years are only exacerbating these conditions," Pallone wrote in a letter Nov. 20 to EPA Administrator Andrew Wheeler.
The emphasis on climate change - which Trump has labeled a "hoax" perpetrated by China - comes amid a cascade of scientific reports, including from the United Nations, that portend catastrophic social, economic and environmental consequences within decades if global temperatures keep rising.
Effects are already being felt through stronger hurricanes, more intense wildfires, melting glaciers and loss of habitat, researchers say.
The Trump administration has made expansion of fossil fuels, including more offshore oil and gas drilling and mining, a centerpiece of its energy and economic agenda. The president also pushed to undo Obama-era steps aimed at addressing climate change: proposing a new Clean Power Plan rule to give states more authority to regulate the industry; recommending a freeze on mile-per-gallon standards for cars and light trucks after the 2020 model year; and withdrawing from the Paris Agreement, the international accord to gradually reduce emissions of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane.
"This agreement is less about the climate and more about other countries gaining a financial advantage over the United States," Trump said June 1, 2017, when he announced the withdrawal from the Paris accord.
An EPA spokeswoman  said the agency was reviewing Pallone's letter.
David Doniger, a climate change expert with the Natural Resources Defense Council, said forcing records into the light of day could pressure the EPA to withdraw rules or Congress to pass laws if they show the agency selectively used information or improperly skewed cost-benefits analyses to favor the fossil fuels industry.
"It's always important to know ... more about the real influence and the real reasons and the real beneficiaries of these decisions," he said. "The public has a right to know that."
Pelosi was speaker in 2009 when the chamber narrowly passed a "cap and trade" bill to address climate change. Portrayed by opponents as little more than an energy tax that would hit consumers' wallets, the measure never came up for a vote in the Democratic-controlled Senate and helped fuel the tea party wave that propelled Republicans to take control of the House in 2010.
Some House Democrats are content with modest efforts to address global warming.
"It's going to be, I think, more of an opportunistic strategy, where, in various pieces of legislation across the board, we're going to insert measures that address climate change," Rep. Gerry Connolly, D-Va., co-chairman of the House Sustainable Energy and Environment Coalition, told The Hill newspaper.
Even if  the House did pass an aggressive plan, it's doubtful the GOP-controlled Senate would take it up. 



Hot, dry future will mean more fires; Climate change makes conditions that spark blazes more common
TODA





The horrific wildfires in California this fall may be more commonplace as the planet warms: Climate change has doubled the odds that a region will suffer the brutal combination of hot and dry weather at the same time, a new study said.
In addition to scorching and ruining crops, those hot, dry conditions can also worsen fire risk, drying out vegetation in the summer and fueling intense, fast-spreading wildfires like those that burned through more than 375 square miles in California this month, killing dozens.
When those extremes occur at the same time, it exacerbates the impacts far beyond what they would have caused separately, according to study lead author Ali Sarhadi of Stanford University.
The study makes intuitive sense since the Earth has warmed about 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit since the late 19th century: "If it's getting warmer everywhere, then it's more likely to be hot in two places at once," study co-author Noah Diffenbaugh said in a statement. He added that "it's probably also more likely to be hot when it's also dry in two places at once."
Specifically, the frequency of warm and dry conditions happening at the same time in the mid-20th century was around 20 percent, the study said. Now, early in the 21st century, it's about 40 percent.
"So, what used to be a rare occurrence can now be expected to occur with some regularity, and we have very strong evidence that global warming is the cause," Diffenbaugh, also of Stanford University, added.
The study was published in the peer-reviewed journal Science Advances.
Looking ahead, within the next several decades, there's as much as a 75 percent chance that average temperatures will rise well beyond what they were around 1950.
Food scarcity because of the hot, dry weather combination will likely affect the two most populated nations on Earth - China and India - both of which are particularly at risk: The probability of warm and dry years in these key crop and pasture regions will be substantially greater over the next 30 years if greenhouse gas emissions aren't reduced, the study authors say.
Harvests of staple food crops such as wheat, rice, corn and soybeans could be threatened.
Scientists say global warming is caused by the burning of fossil fuels such as oil, coal and gas, which release greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane into the atmosphere, and has caused global air and ocean temperatures to rise to levels that cannot be explained by natural factors.
The Stanford study follows a separate research paper published this week by the American Geophysical Union that said extreme heat events in both summer and winter are increasing across the U.S. and Canada. 



'Climate change is a medical emergency'






Global warming is making us sick.
The proportion of Earth's population that's vulnerable to heat-related death and disease continues to grow around the world because of human-caused climate change, according to a report released this week.
"Climate change is a medical emergency," said report co-author Renee Salas, a doctor of emergency medicine at Massachusetts General Hospital. "It is truly harming the health of Americans and especially the most vulnerable ... children, the elderly, minorities and the poor."
Growing populations of older people, people living in cities and people with diseases are the prime reasons for the increasing vulnerability, according to the report, which was released Wednesday and published by The Lancet, a British medical journal. Last year, about 157million vulnerable people were exposed to heat waves globally. That's 18million more than in 2016.
"We're seeing increases in the frequency, intensity and duration of heat waves," said  report co-author Kristie Ebi of the University of Washington. "As our populations age and as they move into cities that have got urban heat islands, we're seeing a large increase in the number of people who are vulnerable to high temperatures."
She said another concern is that the potential geographic range of the mosquito, which can carry diseases such as dengue fever and Zika, has increased dramatically in higher temperatures.
Climate change, aka global warming, is caused by the burning of fossil fuels such as oil, gas and coal, which release greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane into the Earth's atmosphere and oceans. This has caused the planet to warm to levels that cannot be explained by natural factors.
The report, officially titled "The Lancet Countdown on Health and Climate Change," said that in 2017, 153 billion hours of labor was lost worldwide because of heat exposure.
In 2017, the report said, there were 16 extreme weather disasters in the USA, from powerful hurricanes to catastrophic wildfires,  each of which caused more than $1 billion in damage and together cost more than $313 billion.
"While each type of disaster poses different threats to human health, they all can lead to death," according to the report. "The official death toll was estimated at 3,278 lives, though the actual number is likely much higher, highlighting the need for better surveillance."
In an editorial that accompanied the report, The Lancet warned that in the next few decades, "heatstroke and extreme weather will have redefined global labor and production beyond recognition. Multiple cities will be uninhabitable, and migration patterns will be far beyond those levels already creating pressure worldwide."
The report was written by experts from 27 academic institutions, the United Nations and intergovernmental agencies from every continent. 



Another view: Climate groups face major obstacles






Building a massive environmental organization to fight global warming -- much as the National Rifle Association lobbies against gun control -- is an intriguing idea. But no matter the size and funding, it would face obstacles:
Big autos, big oil and big utilities, which pollute as part of business, lobby against environmental protections. Automakers devote vast sums of their  $14 billion marketing budget advertising gas-guzzling SUVs. The oil industry profits by fueling those trucks. And the  coal industry enjoys a president who  peddles fake news about coal's rebirth.
Much of the news media devote only episodic attention to the threats global warming poses, reporting on its most scary impacts, including hurricanes and wildfires, without connecting the dots to the climate.
Consumers, misled by polluters and offered few nonpolluting vehicles and other products, end up declining to act in their long-term health interest.  They have yet to put real pressure on government officials to adopt strong laws and regulations. Nor do they shun industries that fail to limit the burning of coal, petroleum and gas.
In the near term, a president who ignores  science  has declared global warming a "hoax." His environmental rollbacks appear drawn up by the polluters. And virtually every Republican in Congress is a global warming denier.
As the recent massive and shocking report issued by 13 federal agencies made clear, we face the environmental equivalent of the Great Depression. A climate adulterated by industry's carbon dioxide pollution -- two-thirds of it from transportation and power plants -- is already spreading tropical diseases, delivering rising seas, and fueling fierce hurricanes and wildfires.
So, yes, an NRA-like structure is fine, but one modeled after the New Deal's NRA -- the National (Industrial) Recovery Act, which galvanized President Franklin Roosevelt's fight for economic recovery. That's what we need --  clean cars, clean energy and other solutions -- to tackle global warming.
Dan Becker directs the Safe Climate Campaign, and James Gerstenzang is the campaign's editorial director. 



Depression and teens: Are devices to blame?






Teens and college-age adults face pressures that past generations never did.
Spiraling college tuition leaves crippling student loan debt. Active-shooter drills in schools warn students of a real and persistent threat. And political division, the culture wars and climate change remind young Americans of the fragility of the world they are inheriting.
But some experts are debating whether another phenomenon - smartphones, tablet computers and social media - is responsible for the rising rates of depression among children and young adults.
Major depression rates among teens and young adults are rising faster than among the overall population. The authors of a 2016 study in the journal Pediatrics found that rates of major depression among children ages 12 to 17 jumped to 11.3 percent in 2014, up from 8.7 percent in 2005. Major depression among young adults also increased, but at a slower rate.
Ramin Mojtabai, the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health professor who completed the study, says more research is needed on the causes of rising depression rates among teens and young adults.
"One can speculate that increased use of digital devices and social media are among the contributing factors," Mojtabai said. "There is some evidence that cyberbullying puts children and adolescents at increased risk of depression."
San Diego State University psychologist Jean Twenge sees a direct link between how much time teens spend on smartphones and troubling signs of mental health distress.
In her 2017 book "iGen," she cited national health surveys and other statistics to argue that a generation of teens have turned to smartphones as their preferred social outlet, and teens who spend the most time on their screens are more likely to be unhappy.
"What you get is a fundamental shift in how teens spend their leisure time," Twenge told TODAY. "They are spending less time sleeping, less time with their friends face to face. ... It is not something that happened to their parents. It is not something that happens as a world event."
Even tech pioneers have limited their children's use of digital devices over concerns about the effects of technology on the developing brain. Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates capped his kids' cellphone use, and longtime Apple CEO Steve Jobs told The New York Times in 2010 that he did not allow his children to use the then-newly developed iPad.
High-profile investors have asked Apple this year what the company is doing to combat children's device overuse and the resulting mental- and physical-health harms.
But others are skeptical about blaming smartphone use for depression in adolescents and young adults.
"People are jumping to conclusions that there has been a cultural change with the use of social media," says Anne Glowinski, director of adolescent and child psychiatry at education and training at Washington University in St. Louis. "There's a laundry list of things that can be impacting young people."
Sonia Livingstone, a social psychologist at the London School of Economics and Political Science, said there's room for legitimate debate over potential harms and benefits of teens' smartphone use.
But she said several other factors that could be contributing to rising depression. Perhaps the biggest, she said, is that it's more socially acceptable for kids to talk openly about mental health.
"What we have today is a greater degree of visibility," Livingstone told TODAY. "It very easily looks like an epidemic in mental health problems, but 10, 15 years ago, these were shameful things that nobody mentioned."
She said teens and young adults face more pressure to achieve in school and in extracurricular activities.
"It is becoming a more competitive world, and they have to play their part," Livingstone said. "It brings competition much earlier. So it is kind of an undermining of childhood."
Varun Soni, a vice provost at the University of Southern California overseeing the office of wellness and crisis intervention, has noticed a marked difference in his conversations with college-age students over time.
A decade ago, he said, students were more apt to chat about big-picture questions such as the meaning of life, purpose and how to live an extraordinary life.
In recent years, conversations with post-millennials have taken on a more pessimistic tone. Students now talk about a lack of meaning, and despondency. Soni initially thought it was a sign that more vulnerable students were seeking counseling. But he has heard similar feedback from  counterparts at other universities.
He describes it as a "mental health crisis" in higher education. "At the root of it is a sense of disconnection," Soni said. "These are students who are so connected online but disconnected offline. These are students that may have 1,000 friends online but struggle to make friends in real life."
Mary Alvord, a psychologist and adjunct professor at George Washington University School of Medicine, doesn't see a simple explanation for rise in depression rates among adolescents and young adults.
If parents are concerned about their children's time on digital devices, she said, they can limit their use before bedtime or require them to spend more time outdoors without digital devices.
Rather than fixating on their kids' phone use, Alvord said, parents can help children build resilience, encourage them to develop friendships and provide social support. 

USA USA USA