Cities prepare for worst; Local governments act against climate change without federal help



BOSTON - On a sunny summer's day at historic Christopher Columbus Park on Boston's waterfront, it's hard to picture the dormant fury of the Atlantic Ocean as it laps softly at the creaking docks.
57%
of U.S. cities plan
to take climate-related actions
in 2019, according to a
survey of mayors.
But one day, according to the city's climate projections, a massive storm driven by unusually high winds and high tides will pour water over the park's grassy rise and inundate the arbors where grapevines trail and newlyweds pose for photos. The waters will rush across the brick pavers onto Atlantic Avenue and flow toward historic Faneuil Hall and Quincy Market, where generations of tourists have learned about the Boston Tea Party. The floodwaters will threaten nearby Old North Church, where Paul Revere's ride kicked off, and lap at the edges of Bunker Hill.
High tides and strong storms already regularly inundate the area, but this storm would be different. It's a vision that keeps Boston Mayor Marty Walsh up at night.
That's why Walsh is preparing to have the city spend billions of dollars over the next decade to try to blunt the effects  of climate change on the city, including armoring Columbus Park and gently raising it to provide a buffer against the worst the Atlantic can throw.
The plans to harden Columbus Park and large portions of the city's 47 miles of shoreline are part of a massive but generally uncoordinated local-level effort across the country to fight the changes that will accompany the Earth as it continues warming.
Frustrated by what they see as the Trump administration's decision to de-emphasize the danger posed by climate change, local government officials, nonprofit leaders and university researchers are busily forging ahead with limited resources in a piecemeal approach they said is better than nothing. They're hardening buildings, digging bigger storm drains and changing zoning laws to keep homes from being built in low-lying areas prone to flooding.
Though many cities and states are trying to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases to slow global warming, these more concrete efforts are aimed at mitigating the actual impacts of climate change, which many elected officials said is politically easier to tackle.
"Climate change is real, and it's impacting our city right now," Walsh said. "We just can't back down from the threat, regardless of what's happening in Washington, D.C. I would love to have a strong federal partner. We don't have that right now. But that doesn't mean we stop."
An exhaustive federal report issued last month warned that climate change could, under a worst-case scenario, deliver a 10 percent hit to the nation's GDP by the end of the century. The 1,600-page National Climate Assessment details the climate and economic impacts U.S. residents will see if drastic action is not taken to address climate change.
President Donald Trump downplayed the report's findings, complaining that the USA is already very "clean" and that other countries aren't addressing climate change.
"I've seen it. I've read some of it. It's fine," Trump said. Speaking about the potential economic effects, Trump said, "I don't believe it."
Broad scientific consensus says the Earth's climate is warming, and humans accelerate that process though the burning of fossil fuels.
Climate change threatens the health and well-being of the American people by causing increasingly extreme weather, changes to air quality, the spread of new diseases by insects and pests and changes to the availability of food and water, the NCA researchers said.
The report says the changing climate poses a cascading series of linked risks, such as storms destroying aging bridges and roads, which would make it harder to move food and fuel around the country, and droughts making it harder for power plants across the West to safely generate electricity because of a lack of required cooling water.
"Earth's climate is now changing faster than at any point in the history of modern civilization, primarily as a result of human activities," the report concludes.
Experts said the devastating and unusually powerful hurricanes that struck the East Coast over the past decade have done more than any politician could to raise awareness of how much risk the nation faces. Heavy flooding in Texas, warming ocean waters in the Pacific Northwest and New England, and eroding islands in Alaska add even more weight. Scientists have warned for years that ocean levels are rising and that storms will become more violent.
"The number of people having that conversation is larger today than it ever has been in the past," said Mark Misczak,  a longtime emergency manager who spent the bulk of his career as a Federal Emergency Management Agency leader under multiple presidents. "The disasters, as terrible as it sounds, provide an opportunity to re-envision how things function and to consider that resiliency."
Across the country, communities large and small draw on university experts and nonprofit scientists to help chart their course, which they say must be laid down to prepare for climate-related disasters.
Some of the efforts are small, such as Denver's decision to create a list of air-conditioned facilities where residents can take refuge during heat waves. Others are more ambitious: In Alaska, officials are preparing to relocate several native villages in danger of being washed away by seas that no longer freeze solid for months at a time. Many more actions fall into the middle, such as the decision by Florida Keys officials to raise portions of their low-lying roads to serve as flood barriers, or efforts by Austin, Texas, to reduce water consumption in anticipation of droughts.
"It's really simple: This isn't a political issue. The changes we are seeing firsthand are affecting our communities, our economies, affecting ways of life that have existed for millennia," said Michael LeVine of the nonprofit Ocean Conservancy, which worked on climate change issues in Alaska. "We simply don't have a choice. It is incumbent on us as Alaskans to work together. We are past the point of fighting about who did what, who caused what or what the political consequences might be. Our way of life depends on adapting to the changes that are happening."
For many, dealing with climate change is inherently a political issue. A report issued in December by the state of Texas about the need to "future-proof" the state from worsening natural disasters never directly mentions climate change or the role humans have played in emitting heat-trapping carbon dioxide by burning the oil and gas Texas has long been known for.
Republican Gov. Greg Abbott, in releasing the report, said it was "impossible" for him to say whether climate change caused the worsening disasters that hit Texas.
"We need to stop making the old mistakes in local development that expose homes and businesses to risks that only become apparent when disaster strikes," according to the report. "To paraphrase the old saying, an ounce of preparation is worth a pound of cure."
While climate change has largely broken down along partisan lines at the state and federal level, the nation's mayors have overwhelmingly put aside political parties to address the issue. A survey of mayors this year found that 57 percent of cities plan to take climate-related actions in 2019. Dozens of the country's largest cities committed to meeting the terms of the 2025 Paris Agreement on climate change, which Trump is withdrawing from on a national level.
In Boston, Walsh is trying to figure out how to get funding for the city's climate resiliency plan. Taxpayers will contribute 10 percent of all new capital funding in the city toward resilience, but the mayor knows he needs more help from businesses and the state and federal government.
"We're not just planning for the next storm we'll face, we're planning for the storms the next generation will face," Walsh said. "Whatever the federal policy is, it's still going to be incumbent on local leaders to carry out these plans. There's no question that our environment is in trouble, and humans are responsible." 



'Sahara' bronze tapped as car color of the year; Warmer tone works both inside and out



If you're a fashion-forward car shopper, get ready to accessorize around bronze, coppery colors as automakers move away from the white, black silver and grey shades that have dominated the market.
Sahara is hot, and I don't mean climate change. It's the name of the 2019 automotive color of the year, developed by Axalta, the largest supplier of automotive paint.
New technologies and changing tastes in vehicles influenced the choice, along with a keen eye to trends in fashion and design, said Nancy Lockhart, Axalta's global color marketing manager. Axalta was DuPont's paint group before being spun off in 2013.
"Sahara works on all types of vehicles," Lockhart said recently at Axalta's automotive headquarters. "It looks good on large SUVs and trucks - vehicles as big as a Chevy Suburban or Ford F-150 - but also on a little Fiat."
Not every color does. Bright colors like pink and some greens may look fine on a compact or sporty car, but could be overpowering on larger vehicles.
Sahara is a proprietary color Axalta created to showcase the type of colors it sees trending upward.
It's unlikely any automaker will ever use Sahara's exact shade. The color serves more as a conversation starter when Axalta works with designers and takes color samples to automakers around the world.
The company will make Sahara available to aftermarket paint shops, though. The color of the year has become a big deal in the five years since Axalta announced the first one. Some customers will call local paint shops as soon as the color is announced, asking to have it applied to their vehicle.
"It's a warm and sandy color that's timeless, with echoes of gold," Lockhart said. "It's reminiscent of orange without being orange.
Developing colors
for self-driving cars
Last year's color, called Starlite, was a gleaming white. White is the most popular color for vehicles around the world, but Lockhart sees a trend toward brighter, more expressive colors.
Axalta chose white last year in part because it's investigating paints that work with the lidar and other sensors of self-driving vehicles.
People won't forget they like different colors when they start buying autonomous vehicles though, so Axalta is developing a whole palette for them.
Sahara is highly visible to Lidar, a key autonomous sensor. At the same time, it's transparent enough to radar that the color can be used to paint over sensors embedded in the vehicle's bumpers and sides.
It's a soothing color that can be used inside vehicles as well as on exterior panels, Lockhart said.
"Sahara has a bit of a retro feel, without looking old," she said.
That helps it work on performance vehicles, where it could recall the famous gold Pontiac used for paint and accents when its Firebird Trans Am was a cultural icon.
The color also is compatible with accents, stripes and black roofs, all of which are likely to become more common as automakers offer more ways for people to customize their car.
"It was designed to work well with two-toning," Lockhart said.
In addition to mass customization, Axalta sees a growing trend to matte finishes - frequently black - for accents and stripes.
"Sahara isn't one of the top colors in the world today, but it's trending in certain regions," Lockhart said.
Beiges and browns - the part of the spectrum that includes the warmer, gold-tinged Sahara - are increasingly popular in China, the world's largest vehicle market. More than 60 percent of vehicles sold in China today are white.
The top colors today:
White: 38 percent of the world, 29 percent North America.
Black: 18 percent world and North America
Gray: 12 percent world, 16 North America
Silver: 12 world and North America
Bronze and beige shades like Sahara come in at 5 percent worldwide and 4 in North America, but they're primed for growth, Lockhart said. They rose 2 percent in North America last year, their biggest increase in any region.
Axalta sponsors the Eyes on Design awards and Charity Preview at the North American International Auto Show.. When dignitaries cut a ribbon at the Charity Preview Jan. 18, it will be colored Sahara instead of blue.
Axalta also created a Sahara-tinged cocktail, the Detroit Mirage. It's whiskey and Vernor's with a lemon wedge. 



Dems blast Pentagon on climate risk



WASHINGTON - Key Democratic lawmakers say the Trump administration is putting U.S. armed forces at greater risk by not properly acknowledging and preparing for the effects of climate change.
A law Congress passed in 2017 reauthorizing Department of Defense programs requires that the Pentagon spell out how rising sea levels, intensifying wildfires and other risks posed by a warming planet threaten military installations.
The law also requires a list of the top 10 most vulnerable installations within each service and a detailed explanation on mitigation costs, contingency plans and "the frequency of humanitarian assistance and disaster relief missions."
But top Democrats slammed the 22-page report Defense officials sent to lawmakers Thursday as inadequate and "half baked" while demanding the Pentagon issue a more thorough version.
The report lists 79 installations and whether they face current and potential (within the next 20 years) effects of climate change such as flooding and desertification, but it does not prioritize them by risk or offer further details on all but a handful of installations.
Rhode Island Sen. Jack Reed, the top Democrat on the Senate Armed Services Committee, said the report treats climate change "as a back burner issue."
"While those 79 installations are no doubt important for mission assurance, without any prioritization for resources and installation-specific resilience plans, the report is incomplete," he said in a statement Friday. "Instead, the report reads like a introductory primer and carries about as much value as a phone book."
The criticism over the report is the latest attempt by Democrats to make climate change a central issue of their legislative agenda.
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., has revived a special panel on climate change,  and Senate Democrats grilled EPA nominee Andrew Wheeler about Trump administration rollbacks during Wednesday's confirmation hearing.
Party leaders say climate change will be a central debate in the 2020 campaign when President Donald Trump, who has questioned whether climate change is man-made, is up for a second term.
Pentagon spokeswoman Heather Babb called the report "a high-level assessment of the vulnerability of DOD installations (and) provides an overview of efforts to increase installation resiliency."
Babb also described the effects of a changing climate as "a national security issue with potential impacts to DOD missions, operational plans and installations. DOD must be able to adapt current and future operations to address the impacts of a wide variety of threats and conditions, to include those from weather, climate and natural events."
But Democrats faulted the report for not even mentioning two installations hit last year by hurricanes: Tyndall Air Force Base in Florida, which sustained more than $5 billion in losses from Hurricane Michael; and Camp Lejeune in North Carolina, which will cost the Marine Corps roughly $3.7 billion to rebuild after Hurricane Florence.
Rep. Adam Smith, D-Wash., who chairs the House Armed Services Committee, called the report "half baked."
The report "demonstrates a continued unwillingness to seriously recognize and address the threat that climate change poses to our national security and military readiness," he said Friday. "It fails to even minimally discuss a mitigation plan to address the vulnerabilities." 



Ocasio-Cortez fears world will 'end in 12 years'



The youngest woman ever elected to Congress again made headlines and sparked conservative criticism when she said Monday that she and other young Americans fear "the world is going to end in 12 years if we don't address climate change."
Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, D-N.Y., made the remark during an interview with writer Ta-Nehisi Coates at the MLK Now event in New York City celebrating the legacy of Martin Luther King Jr.
Ocasio-Cortez called the fight to mitigate the effects of climate change her generation's "World War II."
"Millennials and Gen Z and all these folks that come after us are looking up, and we're like, 'The world is going to end in 12 years if we don't address climate change, and your biggest issue is how are we gonna pay for it?'" she said.
Climate change has been a driving issue for the freshman Democrat since arriving on Capitol Hill. In November, as she arrived for her orientation, she joined a group of about 200 climate change protesters outside the office of then-Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif.  Since taking office, she has called for a "Green New Deal."
In November, a 1,600-page report from the federal government said the climate is changing faster than at any other point in modern history and the  effects are already being felt. But a dozen years is a short timetable even for those who are most concerned about  global warming - such as naturalist David Attenborough, who has warned that climate change could lead to a "collapse of our civilizations and the extinction of much of the natural world."
Her comment Monday was in response to a question about when and why she decides to "clap back" against her social media critics. She said her main priority is to call out what she believes are widely accepted but incorrect assumptions, including the idea that people must choose between the economy and the environment. She said she does not take the criticism personally but sees it as a "deliberate strategy."
She told Coates, "If you try to attack and discredit the messenger, then perhaps you can discredit the message."
Contributing: Doyle Rice 



Himalayan ice at risk



Antarctica and Greenland aren't the Earth's only frozen places threatened by human-caused climate change: The Himalayas are also at risk, scientists announced Monday.
In fact, two-thirds of Himalayan glaciers could melt by 2100 if global warming continues,  a new report says.
Such a catastrophic melt would disrupt the flow of Asian rivers, a crucial resource for crops for billions of people in China, India and six other countries.
"This is the climate crisis you haven't heard of," said Philippus Wester, a scientist with the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development, which released the report. "Global warming is on track to transform the frigid, glacier-covered mountain peaks ... to bare rocks in a little less than a century."
The glaciers are  a  source of water for about 250 million people in the mountains and  1.65 billion others who live in the river valleys below, the report said. Water from the melting glacial ice could lead to floods along such major rivers as the Ganges and the Indus, potentially destroying crops.
According to the report, the region is known as the world's "Third Pole" for its huge store of ice.  It is  home to Mount Everest, K2 and other iconic peaks.
Prepared over a five-year period with contributions from more than 350 researchers, the report is the first "to lay down in definitive detail the region's critical importance to the well-being of billions and its alarming vulnerability, especially in the face of climate change," said David Molden, director general of the development group that published the study.
Said Dasho Rinzin Dorji of  of the international mountain development organization: "We need to start thinking of mountain regions as climate hotspots worthy of urgent attention." 



What is the Green New Deal?; Resolution would boost clean, renewable fuels



The Earth is facing a climate change deadline, with a looming tipping point into a dramatically changed, less hospitable planet - and Democratic lawmakers are beginning what's likely to be a long discussion over how best to deal with it.These first attempts have coalesced under a Green New Deal championed by Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, D-N.Y., and Sen. Edward Markey, D-Mass.
They introduced a resolution Thursday calling for a dramatic increase in the generation of renewable fuels, such as wind, solar and hydropower sources, and a shift within 10 years to energy systems that are "net-zero" when it comes to greenhouses gases that are the primary contributor to climate change.
The resolution does not call for a full phase-out of fossil fuels, a plank that some environmental advocates had hoped to see.
Instead, it pushes for a transition that is rapid but "fair and just to all communities and workers."
Ocasio-Cortez, who first outlined her environmental plan in December,  has enlisted the help of Sen. Ed Markey, who led House efforts on climate change a decade ago.
The resolution is short on details but long on vision for a cleaner environment that promotes jobs and social justice. It also calls for higher education and job guarantees for all U.S. citizens.
Some Republicans have panned the effort as another arrow in the left's quiver of radical ideas that are unrealistic and prohibitively expensive.
Here's an explanation of the Green New Deal and how likely it is to pass in Congress.
Question: How did the Green New Deal get its name?
Answer: The phrase itself goes back to 2007, when columnist Thomas Friedman wrote a piece in The New York Times calling for a Green New Deal along the lines of President Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal during the Depression. Friedman envisioned the government backing basic research and setting standards, providing loans and using taxes and incentives to remake the U.S. economy.
The phrase later was taken up by Green Party candidate Jill Stein, who used it as part of her presidential platforms when she ran in 2012 and 2016.
Q: So that was 12 years ago. What's happening now?
A: A news conference on Capitol Hill on Thursday afternoon unveiling the Green New Deal will be the first step. Liberal lawmakers led by Ocasio-Cortez also are pushing for the creation of a newcommittee in Congress to implement a Green New Deal.
Q: So what's  in it?
A: The crux is a broad mandate of meeting "100 percent of the power demand in the United States through clean, renewable, and zero-emission energy sources."
Getting there depends on an ambitious agenda: drastically reduce carbon emissions over the next decade by spending on green infrastructure that protects the planet while ensuring justice and equity for all communities.
It calls for the federal government to promote and spend on sustainable farming practices, more training for clean energy sector jobs, cleaner transportation systems such as high-speed rail, and spending on technology that will reduce humans' carbon footprint.
Q: Can we really move to 100 percent renewable energy in a decade?
A: That's practically impossible, experts say, especially if nuclear power - which isn't mentioned in the plan and Green New Deal supporters oppose - isn't in the mix.
For comparison's sake, renewable sources (hydropower, wind and solar mainly) made up 18 percent of the U.S. energy supply, double what they did a decade ago, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration.
That share is projected to rise to 31 percent by 2050 if current trends hold up.
Q: Is the Ocasio-Cortez plan what the Democrats will end up doing?
A: Doubtful. This is the beginning of a political give-and-take that likelywill extend up to the 2020 presidential election - which is exactly how ideas are supposed to be hashed out in the political arena.
"There will be a message battle," said Robert Shrum, a longtime Democratic political consultant who worked on multiple presidential campaigns, including Al Gore in 2000 and John Kerry in 2004 and now a professor of practical politics at the University of Southern California.
"You have a process whereby you begin with a big idea, like the Green New Deal, and you're going to have to negotiate parts of it," he said.
"Nothing is going to be handed down chiseled in stone from the top of the mountain."
Q: What's happened already?
A: House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., has revived a special panel, known as the Select Committee on the Climate Crisis, which has named its chair, Rep. Kathy Castor, D-Fla. The members of the panel were unveiled Thursday but do not include Ocasio-Cortez.
The panel has drawn some fire from liberals even before its first meeting because they don't want anyone crafting the Green New Deal who has accepted money from or has ties to the fossil fuel industry.
Castor, whose 2017 financial disclosure includes an investment into a utilities mutual fund of between $50,001 and $100,000, opposes such a restriction.
Q: Is it too late to make any progress on climate change?
A: Not at all, though it's certainly true that a United Nations climate report that came out in December said "rapid, far-reaching and unprecedented changes to all aspects of society" are needed within a few years to ward off the worst effects of climate change.
But people have the ability to make the changes, Haq said. "The only obstacle is political will. We actually have the technology we need to reduce pollution at scale. That would be a real pickle if we didn't have the technology. But we do."
Q: What do Republicans think of the Green New Deal as it's unfolding?
A: Not much. At least not the ones in power. President Donald Trump continues to promote coal mining and oil drilling, pulled out in 2017 of the global Paris Agreement on climate change mitigation, has repeatedly said he doesn't believe climate change is a man-made problem and frequently conflates short-term weather systems with long-term climate trends. 



To GOP, Green New Deal is Dem self-destruction; Republicans spread word about 'socialist fantasy'



WASHINGTON - Republicans are talking a lot about the Green New Deal after its rollout on Capitol Hill this month by liberal Democratic Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez.
It's not because the GOP supports the transformation of the electric grid from fossil fuels to renewable energy called for in the plan to combat climate change. Or because Republicans agree with the approach the plan lays out for boosting Americans' economic security and giving people access to affordable health care.
Just the opposite.
GOP officials expect the road map offered by Ocasio-Cortez, D-N.Y., and  environmental advocate Sen. Ed Markey, D-Mass., will help them hammer home their criticisms of Democratic economic policies they contend would move the country toward socialism.
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., convinced the plan is a loser for Democrats, announced Tuesday that he plans to bring up the measure for a Senate vote "to give everybody an opportunity to go on record to see how they feel about the Green New Deal."
That would mean putting several Democratic senators who are running for president, including Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, Cory Booker of New Jersey and Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota, in the position of angering liberal voters if they don't back the plan or turning off those independents who view it as too liberal.
Opening a discussion on the Green New Deal carries risks for Republicans as well, said former Rep. Carlos Curbelo, a Florida Republican who co-founded the bipartisan Climate Solutions Caucus. "When Republicans controlled Congress, this was not getting attention," Curbelo, who does not support the Green New Deal, told USA TODAY. "That's going to change, and everyone soon will have to go on the record, not just expressing what they're against but what they're for."
Dozens of Democrats have gotten behind the Green New Deal to show voters they support drastic action to address climate change and the threat that numerous scientists and researchers say it poses to Earth.
The ambitious plan calls not only for moving the power grid to 100 percent renewable energy by the 2030s but also a fundamental reshaping of the U.S. economy that guarantees jobs, health care and housing for all Americans.
Backers say the broadly worded, nonbinding resolution is  a way to spotlight an issue that will play a prominent role in the 2020 presidential election as much as it is a blueprint for solving the threat to the planet.
Senate Minority Leader Charles Schumer said it's ironic McConnell would bring the resolution  to the floor when he usually prevents measures he doesn't like from getting a vote.
"I say, 'Go for it. Bring it on.' You think it might embarrass Democrats to vote on a nonbinding resolution that maybe some of us support but not others? Trust me. We'll be fine," the New York Democrat said on the Senate floor Thursday. If "McConnell blocks amendments, we'll know where he and his party stand - against science, against fact, ostriches with their heads buried in the sand as the tide comes in."
Curbelo, who lost re-election in November, said he believes most Republican lawmakers on Capitol Hill agree with the science that human-caused climate change is heating the planet and posing numerous risks from increased drought, more severe weather and rising sea levels.
Republicans are "evolving in a meaningful way" on climate change, and there are "very few" who share President Donald Trump's skepticism of climate change, said Curbelo, who joined the Columbia Center on Global Energy Policy after leaving office.
That hasn't stopped GOP lawmakers from trying to score points or raise money from the Democratic plan.
"The radical left wing of the Democratic Party has unveiled their 'Green New Deal' - a socialist fantasy to wreck our economy and fundamentally altering our way of life," McConnell wrote in a fundraising email Wednesday. "On their wish list? Ending air travel. Destroying American energy. Banning cow farts. Yes, cow farts."
"No planes. No cars. No cows," read an email from Rep. Liz Cheney, R-Wyo., using the Green New Deal in a pitch for campaign dollars.
"This new proposal - the first priority of the new liberal majority - is completely outrageous," Rep. Greg Pence, R-Ind., the vice president's brother, said in a fundraising email last week to supporters. "They want to limit what you drive. They want to stop all air travel. They want to give money to people 'unwilling to work.' They even want to monitor what you eat."
Republicans based those criticisms on initial drafts of the plan that called for more dramatic steps such as the building of high-speed rail "at a scale where air travel stops becoming necessary." They seized on Ocasio-Cortez's warning that the "world is going to end in 12 years if we don't address climate change." 



CO2 buildup could end up choking our grandchildren



Emissions of carbon dioxide - the greenhouse gas most responsible for global warming - could soar to levels not seen in 56 million years by the middle of next century, scientists warned in a study Wednesday.
Though it won't happen in our lifetimes, it could very well happen in the lives of our grandchildren or great-grandchildren.
"You and I won't be here in 2159, but that's only about four generations away," said study author Philip Gingerich, a University of Michigan paleoclimate researcher.
He said humans pump carbon dioxide into the atmosphere at a rate nine to 10 times higher than it was during a natural global warming event roughly 56million years ago.
That era, known by scientists as the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM), was Earth's warmest period since the extinction of the dinosaurs 66million years ago. According to the study, during that period, the poles were ice-free, and the Arctic was home to palm trees and crocodiles.
That warmth caused a major extinction of organisms in the deep ocean that are a key link in the marine food web.
Scientists aren't sure what caused that spike in carbon dioxide during that era, but we know what's causing it now.
The burning of fossil fuels such as coal, oil and gas releases greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane into Earth's atmosphere and oceans. That extra carbon has caused temperatures to rise to levels over the past century and a half that cannot be explained by natural factors, scientists say.
"The rates of carbon release that are happening today are really unprecedented," said Gabriel Bowen, a University of Utah geophysicist.
The increase in gases such as carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide fuels climate change, making "the planet more dangerous and inhospitable for future generations," the World Meteorological Organization said.
Experts said that to slow or stop carbon emissions and this unnatural warming of the planet, people, governments and businesses must reduce burning fossil fuels and shift to renewable, carbon-free energy.
"It's not just about 100 years from now; it's going to take significant periods of time for that carbon dioxide to make its way back into the Earth's crust," said Larisa DeSantis, a paleontologist at Vanderbilt University. "It's not a short-term event. We're really committing ourselves to many thousands of years of a warmer world if we don't take action quickly."
Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology, a journal of the American Geophysical Union, published the study. 



To a warming planet's rescue: Carbon capture



PALISADES, N.Y. - Peter Kelemen spends time in Oman looking for ways to pull carbon out of the air and put it back underground. His colleague, David Goldberg, looks at ways to store it far below the sea floor off the Oregon coast. Chemical engineer Alissa Park is working with steel mills in China to turn slag and waste carbon dioxide into reusable material.
The goal of all three Columbia University researchers - and thousands of scientists and engineers globally - is to find ways to pull some of the carbon dioxide that's causing global warming out of the atmosphere and store it away. It's called carbon capture and storage, and experts increasingly say it's going to be essential to saving the planet.
Carbon capture and storage might sound like the plot of a  science-fiction movie, one where an intrepid band of risk-takers swoops in to save the Earth from certain destruction with engineering, grit and (in some scenarios) good old American know-how.
Except it's no Hollywood film.
In the atmosphere, carbon dioxide acts like a blanket, keeping the heat in. The more of it there is, the hotter things get. Before the Industrial Revolution of the 1800s, carbon dioxide levels in Earth's atmosphere were about 280 parts per million. Today, they've reached 410 ppm.
"People think that if the U.S. consumer just reduces her energy consumption, that will solve the problem. But it won't," said Kelemen, a geochemistry professor at Columbia's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory in Palisades, New York.
Calling on a tax credit
Carbon capture means just that: using industrial-strength scrubbers to grab carbon dioxide pollution as it's emitted from the chimneys of power plants, steel mills, cement factories, ethanol distillers and other industries so it's not spewed into the atmosphere. Or in some cases, simply sucking it out of the air itself.
Making large-scale carbon capture and storage happen became a lot more likely a year ago in February when Congress passed potentially momentous legislation aimed at combating climate change.
Close to 20 years in the making and long fought for by a diverse coalition of environmental groups, oil and gas companies, industries and unions, the legislation turned an older tax credit for capturing and storing carbon into what could be a  powerful tool for fighting global warming. Called 45Q in the tax code, it creates a  credit of $35 for each ton of carbon dioxide stored permanently underground in oil and gas fields and a higher value credit of $50 for each ton of carbon dioxide stored in other geologic formations from which no oil is produced.
Assigning a dollar value
The  subsidy moves taking carbon dioxide out of energy and industrial processes from the "nice idea but generally impractical" side of the balance sheet to the "we could make money if we do this" side, said Brad Crabtree of  the Great Plains Institute, a nonprofit energy and policy organization in Bismarck, North Dakota.
"For the first time, it actually puts a price on carbon dioxide - it's the first step of a design for a carbon market," said Julio Friedmann of  Columbia University's Center on Global Energy Policy and a former official at the  Department of Energy during the Obama administration.
It's a technology the U.S. could be a global leader on, said Kurt Waltzer of the Clean Air Task Force, a Boston-based environmental group that focuses on pragmatic climate  solutions.
The U.S. is uniquely situated to capitalize on carbon capture and storage efforts because it has multiple industries that produce lots of carbon dioxide as waste, a large oil industry and, crucially, 4,000 miles of carbon dioxide pipeline to get it from one location to the other.
Common ground in the debate
It's no secret that since the 1990s, climate policy debates in the U.S.have been characterized by deep political divisions between Republicans and Democrats, between the coasts and the heartland, and between fossil fuel and renewable energy. Carbon capture has brought them together.
The 45Q tax credit created some surprising bedfellows. Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse, a Democrat from Rhode Island, supported it because he worried about his state drowning. Sen. John Barrasso, a Republican from Wyoming, wanted a future for coal.
"You've got environmental organizations sitting right next to coal companies and labor unions -- when does that happen?" said Lee Anderson, governmental affairs director for the Utility Workers Union of America.
Carbon capture and storage is by no means the only solution. But to keep Earth from heating up, humanity will need to use every tool in its toolbox.
"We have to do lots and lots and lots of things, a whole laundry list of things,"  Anderson said.  "You can't just pick the ones you like and ignore the others. You've got to do them all." 



How to face a flooded future; Innovations insulate against climate ravages



Houses on stilts. Floating buildings. More parks to absorb water. Better maps to warn those at risk.
City planners, builders, engineers and scientists race to find new ways for people to make a home as climate change threatens to bring increased heavy flooding, dangerous weather conditions and extreme storm surges.
Recent events have made clear how urgent the problem is. Dozens of flood records were broken this week in the Upper Midwest, the National Weather Service said. Heavy flooding that began last week from Minnesota to Missouri killed at least four people, caused more than $1.5 billion in estimated losses and damages and destroyed more than 2,000 homes. The National Weather Service said flooding in South Dakota and Iowa could soon reach historic levels.
In southern Africa, a cyclone and related flooding devastated parts of Malawi, Mozambique and Zimbabwe last week. The confirmed death toll surpassed 500, and hundreds more are feared dead in towns and villages that were submerged.
Experts said that even as some areas grow drier and more drought-prone, others will experience more violent and wetter storms as climate change makes global weather more variable and extreme.
For areas experiencing more flooding, there is hope. Answers range from the fanciful to the concrete (literally).
The book "2100: A Dystopian Utopia" envisions what cities will look like after climate change: Low-lying and coastal cities have been destroyed by rising sea levels and storm surge inundation. Inland towns struggle with droughts and wildfires. Global megacities have become more compact and are almost completely rebuilt to deal with new norms. Sao Paulo frequently floods, so homes are suspended above the waters. The Brooklyn borough of New York City is protected by storm-surge barriers while turbines and parks line Gowanus Canal to soak up water and energy from the frequent storms.
Though these scenarios might seem far-fetched, some of what's described in the book by architect Vanessa Keith is based on technologies that have already been built.
Flood bypasses
Planners know that near river systems, the best protection against flooding is to leave areas around the watercourse as parkland or farmland.
This type of mitigation is common in the Sacramento Delta in California and along the Mississippi River, said John Cain, director of conservation for California flood management with the nonprofit American Rivers, which works to protect and restore the nation's rivers. Heavy rains this spring near California filled those flood bypasses, which protected nearby cities and towns.
One response to increased flooding is simply to move.
That was the choice made by  Pattonsburg, Missouri, in 1998. After flooding more than 33 times, the town voted to move as a group to higher ground. The town of Valmeyer in Illinois made the same decision.
If moving is not an option, many areas build levees and dams to protect against flooding. According to the Army Corps of Engineers, more than 14 million people  live behind levees, in all 50 states.
Such barriers carry risks. "Levees and dams only work up to a point, and when they fail, they fail catastrophically, like Katrina," Cain said, referring to more than 50 levee and floodwall failures in the New Orleans area in 2005 during Hurricane Katrina. The resulting flooding killed at least 1,833.
One option for newly built areas is creating holding ponds to capture runoff, so the water doesn't pour as quickly into streams and rivers, said Kenneth Kunkel, a professor of climate science at North Carolina State University in Asheville.
These are common enough nationally that they're listed as a flood mitigation strategy by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. One example is the High Point neighborhood in Seattle, which was redeveloped in the early 2000s to include a stormwater pond to keep homes from flooding during heavy rains. It was the first large-scale natural drainage system in the area and diverts 80 percent of the area's stormwater runoff, so nearby Longfellow Creek doesn't overflow.
Cheaper over long term
For private developers and individual homeowners, there are many ways to build more safely in flood-prone areas.
"It's actually cheaper to build hazard-resistant homes than it is to build to the minimum building codes and then fix things," said Jeremy Gregory, a research scientist at Massachusetts Institute of Technology who studied Katrina and other disasters.
"Over its lifetime, you spend more time on the repairs than on the initial construction costs," said Gregory, who directs a hub that studies how concrete can be used for engineering applications.
Home foundations can be raised so they are farther above ground and less likely to flood. In areas of Florida and the East Coast, homes are built on piers.
"It's really an elevation game, is what it comes down to. The higher you are, the less likely you are to get wet," said William Sweet, a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration expert on sea level rise.
The one downside is that although "you can raise your house, you're still driving through water to get to your house," he said.
An old-but-new choice is to build houses above ground level: The first story holds the garage or storage, and living quarters are up one floor. This long-known building technique  became less common as flood insurance became available and people moved often enough that they didn't have a stake in building for the long term. This style of home was called a raised cottage.
A more extreme choice is to create homes that can move out of harm's way. A British company, the Larkfleet Group, is working on an experimental house that could rise on jacks above floodwaters. The house could be raised 41/2 feet in less than five minutes.
One of the biggest adaptation tools for homeowners is information, but what's mostly available are government maps that show 100-year flood and extreme precipitation areas.
"They're based on the assumption that the future will be like the past, and that's just about the worst assumption that a person could make in our current situation," Kunkel said.
At the University of California-Irvine, professor Brett Sanders and his team build computer models that show historic flooding and areas at risk because of climate change to give residents access to as much information as is available. 



Melting Everest glacier exposes dead climbers



Not even Mount Everest appears immune to global warming. And a new concern has emerged as a result of glacial melting: exposed bodies.
Melting ice and snow on Everest caused by higher temperatures revealed the bodies of dead climbers, CNN reported.
Ang Tshering Sherpa, former president of the Nepal Mountaineering Association, told CNN that climbers found the bodies as a result of climate change, because "snow and glaciers are fast-melting."
Bodies are being removed from the Chinese side of Everest as the spring climbing season is about to begin, the BBC reported. The Expedition Operators Association of Nepal told the BBC that removing the bodies has been difficult because of a law requiring the involvement of government agencies.
CNN reported more than 200 people have died on Everest's peak since 1922.
"This issue needs to be prioritized by both the government and the mountaineering industry," Dambar Parajuli, president of the expedition operators association, told the BBC.
According to a report in 2016 from The Washington Post, it can cost $30,000 to $70,000 to retrieve a body from the mountain. Most deaths on Everest occur in the "death zone," a portion of the mountain above 26,000 feet, the Post reported. 



Green New Deal withers away in Senate; Proposal gets no votes - not even from Democrats



WASHINGTON - The Green New Deal, Democrats' aspirational proposal to confront climate change and address social justice, died Tuesday in the Senate.
And Democrats helped slay it.
No senator voted for it; 57 (including all Republicans and a handful of Democrats) voted against it; and the remaining 43 (all Democrats) voted "present" as a protest.
The vote was on a procedural matter to continue debate on the bill crafted by liberal firebrand Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. At least 60 votes were needed to keep the bill moving, meaning the legislation is dead - for now.
Congressional Democrats viewed the effort by Republicans - who ridicule the plan as socialist fantasy - to bring the ambitious plan to the floor as little more than a political ploy to divide Democrats rather than a serious effort to confront an impending planetary crisis.
Senate Minority Leader Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., called it a "sham" hours before the roll call vote.
Democrats had asked the Republican leadership to schedule hearings with experts and build broad support for a bipartisan solution before going straight to the floor. Republicans demurred.
"Climate change is not a joke," said Sen. Ed Markey, D-Mass., a co-sponsor of the plan  with Ocasio-Cortez, D-N.Y. "Mocking it and comparing it to cartoon characters while the Midwest is flooded and people have died because of climate-related extreme weather is shameful."
The Democrats' retreat is likely to give GOP opponents ammunition to accuse Democrats of saying one thing and doing another, a point Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., made.
"If you believe the Green New Deal is the prescription for America, why would you not want to vote on it?" he said on Capitol Hill before the vote.
McConnell has said he wants to get Senate Democrats - several of whom are running for president in 2020 - "on record" about the measure.  President Donald Trump, a skeptic of human-caused climate change, has poked fun at the proposal, saying "when the wind stops blowing, it's the end of your electric."
Wyoming GOP Sen. John Barrasso, who chairs the Committee on the Environment and Public Works, noted that every Democratic senator running for president has co-sponsored the plan.
Spurred by government reports warning of drastic consequences of climate change, Ocasio-Cortez and Markey unveiled the proposal in February. It calls not only for combating climate change by eliminating carbon emissions caused by fossil fuels and shifting the economy to one powered by renewable fuels but also prescribes a broad platform supporting free housing, medical coverage and higher education for all Americans.
GOP senators ridicule the plan because the Green New Deal's original talking points called for even further-reaching goals: a build-out of high-speed rail that would make carbon-emitting airplane travel obsolete; an end to dependence of nuclear power as well as fossil fuels; and the creation of "a sustainable, pollution and greenhouse gas free, food system" that would no longer rely on "farting cows."
"Basically, the Green New Deal is an assault on cows, cars and combustion," Sen. Lamar Alexander, R-Tenn., said on the Senate floor Monday.
Delaware Sen. Tom Carper, the top Democrat on the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee, said the debate is no laughing matter.
"This is not a time for derision. This is not a time for division," Carper said on the Senate floor Monday. "On an issue as serious as this, we ought to be serious about addressing it."
Although Democrats are united in wanting to aggressively address climate change, party lawmakers have been divided over whether the Green New Deal is the best approach. A number of moderate Democrats have distanced themselves from the parts of the measure.
Even though Democrats control the House, there are no immediate plans to bring the proposal to the floor for a vote. 



War. Famine. Drought.; More women say they won't have children because of climate change



Though Laura Formisano says she never felt a huge desire to have children, she used to presume that would change.
But climate change could make the planet so uninhabitable, she says, she's not sure she can ever bring herself to become a parent.
"It almost feels like a con, to bring a child into the world when it's probably not going to be a place we're really going to want to live," says Formisano, 30, who manages a co-working space in Los Angeles and has been married for seven months.
Is the future simply too horrific to bring children into? Some couples, frightened by the prospect of droughts, wars, famines and extinctions brought on by climate change, are making that decision.
A Facebook group for women to discuss the idea launched this month, and it's winning  supporters in Europe and the USA. Conceivable Future, a U.S.-based group, has held more than 50 house parties in 16 states in recent years where women worried about global warming discuss forgoing motherhood.
"There are around 70 new signups in the last seven days," says Blythe Pepino, who helped create the Facebook page #BirthStrike.
The reasons women come to that decision are many and varied, but they tend to focus on what they call a clear-eyed view of the changes a warming planet are likely to bring.
For some, the consequences are all too easy to imagine.
Eight years ago, a tornado devastated Christy LeMaster's hometown of Joplin, Missouri. The monster storm was 22 miles long and at times a mile wide. It killed 158 people, injured 1,150 and destroyed almost 7,000 homes. LeMaster's family was OK, but she knows many people who weren't.
"The reality is, they're still rebuilding. Tornadoes on that scale are only supposed to happen every 50 or 60 years. When catastrophes on this scale start happening more often, what does life look like?" says LeMaster, 38, who lives in Chicago and curates public programs at the Museum of Contemporary Art Chicago.
Though LeMaster says she's not someone who has "a deep drive for child-bearing," she'd long thought she would have kids. But as climate change stokes the prospect of serious economic dislocation and fights over resources, "I feel even more scared now," she says.
"If I'm honest with myself, I don't know what water will look like in 10 years, what temperatures will look like in 15, or even food distribution."
Ocasio-Cortez asks the question
Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, D-N.Y., 29, who pushed for a Green New Deal to  fight climate change, broached the topic last month on Instagram.
"There's scientific consensus that the lives of children are going to be very difficult, and it does lead, I think, young people to have a legitimate question - is it OK to still have children?" she says in a video streamed from her kitchen.
Newlywed Luci Kade of Atlanta says her friends don't talk about climate change much, which she attributes to the shift "happening on a larger and slower scale than we can comprehend." But the trends are clear to her, and she says she can't ignore them.
"It's really important to respond to the climate change crisis by actually treating it like a crisis. ...  You don't go on with business as usual," says Kade, 28.
The forest fires, hurricanes and other catastrophic weather events in recent years give her pause about what kind of world humanity will live in 30 or 40 years from now.
Because of that, she and her wife decided to adopt. Kade works in the foster care system, so she knows how many children there need families. "It just feels morally and ethically irresponsible to have my own children," she says.
There's growing concern over the dangers climate change poses. People in 13 of 26 countries polled by the Pew Research Center last month said it is the top international threat.
Women more than men are worried. In the USA, 66 percent of women cited global climate change as a major threat to the nation; 51 percent of men did.
Last October, the United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change warned that mankind has 12 years to act to avoid "rapid, far-reaching and unprecedented changes in all aspects of society." Even in the best scenarios, it said, the world will face more extreme weather  - more wildfires, more droughts, more floods, rising sea levels and the loss of almost all coral reefs.
Whether that affects  family planning isn't known. The U.S. birthrate has been falling for years, and in 2017, it was 60.3 births per 1,000 women - the lowest fertility rate since the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention began keeping records in 1909. Causes such as women marrying later, worries about the economy and the difficulty of finding affordable child care have all been suggested.
'You're on your own'
No one has polled American women to ask whether climate change is a part of their decision. In Australia, a survey of 6,500 women released last month found 22 percent of respondents in their 30s said they were considering having no more children, or not to have children at all, because of climate change.
"It would break my heart having this child that you love, that you nurture and raise, and then you're leaving them behind with a 'Well, good luck! Things aren't going to get better, you're on your own,'" Formisano says.
Her husband agrees, she says. "He always says, 'We're too many. We don't need to have this many people on Earth.'"
In 2014, Meghan Kallman and Josephine Ferorelli met at a concert in New Hampshire. Both 30 at the time, they began talking about climate change and "within five minutes" came to the topic of not having children because of their worries about how bad things seemed likely to get, they say.
They had never found a place to share their fear. After talking most of the night, they decided they couldn't be the only ones wrestling with such concerns. They launched house parties where people could talk about  family planning and climate change.
Kallman, a professor of international development at the University of Massachusetts-Boston, and Ferorelli, a climate activist in Chicago, acknowledge that whatever happens, as two white women in the USA, they won't find things as difficult as women elsewhere in the world. Even so, they're consumed by "the knowledge that what we're facing is so much worse than we imagine," Kallman says.
Difficult decisions
Ryanne Hoogeboom, 38, attended one of the early events. She lives in Albuquerque with her 4-year-old daughter, Kit. Though she loves her daughter dearly, she and her partner decided not to have any more children. "He's in the same camp I am," she says.
When Hoogeboom explains to relatives why Kit doesn't have any siblings, she gets confused looks if she mentions climate change.
"People don't really understand what I'm so freaked out about. 'It's going to get figured out' is their attitude," she says.
To be sure, the decision to not have children isn't a full-on movement; it's more a discussion beginning to bubble up in people's consciousness. Organizers are clear that it's not about population control.
"It's not like my choosing to have a kid or not is going to solve the climate crisis," Kallman says.
The goal isn't to get women and men to pledge not to have children but instead to provide a place to talk about a topic that most people don't want to discuss.
"It's not anybody's answer to this question that matters, it's the fact that people are even having to ask this question," Ferorelli says. "That's what's messed up." 



Democrats want US back in Paris deal; Measure is 'only Step 1' in climate change push



WASHINGTON - A day after Senate Republicans short-circuited the Green New Deal, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi unveiled a significantly more modest approach Wednesday to addressing climate change: to block the Trump administration from abandoning the international accord known as the Paris Agreement.
Calling climate change "the existential threat of our time," Pelosi described the Climate Action Now Act as "only Step 1" of Democrats' efforts to confront global warming.
The move is far less ambitious than the Green New Deal, the sweeping proposal from Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, D-N.Y., that calls for shifting completely from fossil fuels to renewable energy in the coming years and prescribes a broad social justice platform that includes free housing, medical coverage and higher education for all Americans.
A number of Democrats, including Pelosi, had signaled for weeks that they weren't ready to get behind such an ambitious plan that had no chance of getting passed in a GOP-controlled Senate or being signed by President Donald Trump.
In unveiling the bill Wednesday, House Democrats tried to reclaim the narrative in Washington after several days of Republican victories, including special counsel Robert Mueller's finding that the Trump campaign did not collude with the Russian government to interfere in the 2016 U.S. election.
The Democrats'  bill seeks to force the U.S. back into the Paris Agreement, in which nearly 200 countries in 2015 committed to keeping global temperatures no more than 2 degrees Celsius above preindustrial levels. Though the accord imposes no penalty for nations that miss the carbon emissions levels they set for themselves, they are required to monitor, report and periodically reassess those targets.
Trump has touted his decision to leave the agreement in 2017 as a move to boost the U.S. economy, especially manufacturing and energy jobs. Democrats, environmental groups and some economists counter that the growth of green jobs would more than make up for jobs lost in the fossil fuel industry.
Also Wednesday, Senate Democrats planned to unveil a Special Committee on Climate Change as a way to keep the  debate alive after  Tuesday's defeat. 



Denali has a poop problem: Frozen human waste is thawing; Mountain climbers will have to pack it back out



There's good news and bad news at Denali, North America's tallest mountain.
The bad news is that 66 tons of frozen feces left by climbers on the Alaska summit is likely to start melting out of the glacier in the coming decades,  possibly as soon as this summer, a process that's speeding up in part because of global warming.
The good news is that this year, for the first time, the guide companies that lead many of the 1,200 climbers who attempt the summit each year have voluntarily decided to start packing out their human waste. A year ago, the National Park Service instituted a policy that all such waste below 14,000 feet must be carried off the mountain.
"Climbers and particularly guide services are really embracing the new policy and are even exceeding it. It has become kind of an informal badge of merit to carry off all your waste," said Michael Loso, a National Park Service glaciologist who has studied the problem of climber excrement on the mountain for close to a decade.
Denali is a majestic mountain about five hours north of Anchorage, Alaska. At 20,300 feet, it's visible from the city on clear days. It's one of the Seven Summits, the highest mountains on each of the seven continents. Conquering them all is considered a major mountaineering challenge in the climbing world.
The poop problem is very real. Climbers scaling Denali, which was previously known as Mount McKinley, generate almost 2 metric tons of human waste each year, according to the National Park Service. (The average human "deposit" weighs half a pound, and the average length of a climber's stay on the mountain is 18 days, which is how researchers got the figure of 66 tons over the course of the past century.)
Initially, human waste was left in snow pits on the Kahiltna Glacier, the most common route up, or thrown into deep crevasses at higher elevations. It was believed the waste would be ground up in the ice over time.
It turns out that what goes around comes around, even in a glacier, Loso said. He performed several experiments that show the buried feces eventually resurface farther downstream on the surface of the glacier, where they begin to melt.
This is true of all glaciers, which are extremely slow-moving rivers of ice, though the process seems to be speeding up.
Research by the National Park Service found that in the past 50 years, the area covered by ice within the Alaskan parks has diminished by 8 percent.
"We have lost more glacier cover in the Alaskan national parks than there is area in the whole state of Rhode Island," Loso said.
"One of the consequences of warming temperatures is that the surface of the glacier is melting more quickly," he said.
This means that waste deposited at the lowest climbing camp on Denali could start reappearing soon, maybe even this climbing season, which begins this month. Waste deposited higher up the mountain will take longer to appear.
"That could be as much as two to three centuries," Loso said.
Park Service staff keep their eyes open, but Loso said they're not making special trips to look for excrement.
Still pretty yucky
Denali has to deal with excrement. On Mount Everest, melting glaciers are exposing the bodies of climbers long  buried in the snow and ice. Because Denali's elevations are lower, most climbers who die on the mountain are carried off.
A 40-some-year trip through a glacier doesn't make human waste any less gross. Loso's research suggests that, in general, the bacteria and other bugs that live in feces survive after being buried in the snow or dropped in a crevasse. Tests of the rivers into which the glacier melts found fecal coliform bacteria, albeit in amounts well below the standard for recreational lakes and rivers.
"The waste will emerge at the surface not very different from when it was buried.  ... We expect it to still smell bad and look bad," Loso said.
Packing it out
The National Parks Service realized there was a poop problem on Denali years ago.
In 2001, it launched a pilot program with the American Alpine Club climbing group to test small, lightweight portable toilets called Clean Mountain Cans. The reusable bucket-size containers hold 1.8gallons of solid waste and are lined with a biodegradable bag.
Last year's climbing season was the first in which all climbers were required to pack out their excrement below 14,000 feet. Above that, they are allowed to throw the frozen bags into one designated area in a deep ice crevasse.
This season, six of the seven guide companies - which take about 50 percent of climbers up the mountain - voluntarily committed to packing out all their waste, said Tucker Chenoweth, a mountaineering ranger at Denali with the National Park Service.
That means carrying cans of excrement to the summit and back. It's something the guide companies have been doing informally for a while, but they're making the leap into total removal.
It's not the easiest thing to do, said Todd Burleson, president of Alpine Ascents International.
"You're already carrying 100 pounds, and then you're adding another 20pounds of feces. But it's the right thing to do," he said.
Guides delicately noted that up on the mountain, where climbers eat mostly freeze-dried food, bathroom needs are a little different than down below.
"It might not be an 'everyday' thing," said Joe Horiskey, director of RMI Expeditions.
On the lower part of the climb, climbers use sleds to hold their gear, which includes the cans. Because of the altitude, the cans' contents freeze, so they're not smelly.
On the last leg of the climb, the sleds aren't used, and the cans are strapped to climbers' backpacks.
"This is something we will all be getting used to," Horiskey said. "But it's the best thing for the mountain. It's just what we're going to have to do." 



Life after climate change



"Every single proposed solution will simultaneously improve life and decrease carbon emissions," said Noah Diffenbaugh, a professor of climate science at Stanford University in Palo Alto, California, who has provided testimony and scientific expertise to the White House, the governor of California and U.S. congressional offices.
These predictions presume that the shift to carbon-neutral energy, industrial and transportation systems will happen in time to slow and eventually reverse the effects of global warming the planet is already beginning to experience: rising oceans, more flooding, worse storms and increased heat waves and droughts.
Whatever happens next, experts said, depends entirely on how quickly we act. Many of these technological and policy changes have begun but need to be sped up, they said. Humans pour 37 gigatons of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases into the atmosphere annually. People must shift away from those carbon emissions within the next 20 years to avoid "rapid, far-reaching and unprecedented changes in all aspects of society," according to the United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
A day in a new world
For Earth Day, let's presume we've  made that shift to a carbon-neutral world and you, your children or your grandchildren are waking up on a crisp fall morning sometime between 2050 and 2100. What's the day like?
Houses won't look all that different, though homes will almost certainly have solar power if it's appropriate for the area.  That will be especially important in hot and sunny parts of the country, to decrease the pressure on power production for cooling during the day. California has a law requiring that all  homes built after 2020 include solar panels.
Homes will still have heat and cooling, electric lights, lots of electronics and big windows, but the systems and appliances will be much more efficient.
This shift is already happening - refrigerators are about 20% larger but use one-quarter the electricity compared  with those sold 20 years ago. The LED lightbulbs you buy at the grocery store use 20% of the energy the incandescent bulbs of a decade ago did, said Jay Apt, a physicist and professor who directs the Electricity Industry Center at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh.
When  people get out of bed, the house will  be a comfortable temperature. Properties will probably still have a furnace or an electric heat pump, but they won't be used as much because homes will be much better insulated.
The systems used to heat buildings probably will look different from the ones we know. One example already used in some  buildings involves preheating or chilling water  when power is cheap,  then using it during the day when power is more expensive.
After getting out of bed, the next step might be to check the dishwasher to get out a cup for coffee. The dishwasher, along with most appliances, will probably be tied to a smart system in your house that knows the power cost at different times of the day. If the power company gets significant power from wind turbines, the cheapest power may be at night. If it's from solar, it might be cheapest during the day.
"Your dishwasher may very well communicate with the electric power grid and say, 'OK, Mr. Smith has decided that he only wants to run his dishwasher only when the price of power is less than 12 cents per kilowatt-hour,' so your dishwasher may decide to run at 2 in the morning," Apt says.
Or you might set an override to tell the appliance that whatever the price, the dishes have to be done by 6 p.m., in time for dinner.
Here a turbine, there a turbine
Coal, oil and many natural-gas-fired power plants will have long ago closed. The nation will probably be powered by a mix of nuclear, wind, solar and hydroelectric energy and some natural gas.
The power grid will have been rebuilt to accommodate more periodic power inputs, which will afford  better protection against physical and cyberattacks.
When people drive across America, the sight of large solar arrays or wind turbines will be common, much like  oil rigs are  an everyday sight now. You might run across tall arrays that pull carbon dioxide out of the air and turn it into fuel and the raw material for industrial uses.
Fun cars, fast charging
The car of the future will be electric because electricity is easy to generate from carbon-neutral sources such as wind, solar and nuclear. It's a shift that has begun.  In Norway, 58% of all cars sold in March were electric, according to Norway's Road Traffic Information Council.
That's a far cry from the less than 1% of cars in the USA that are electric. The experts presume the shift will happen relatively quickly. It won't be wrenching, said Chris Field, director of Stanford University's Woods Institute for the Environment.
"The electric car I have right now is the best car I've ever had. It's a Chevy Bolt. It's very practical, well thought out and fun to drive. It's a really great car," he said.
Those future cars will probably have a range between charges far greater than today's 225 miles. Estimates put it at 400 miles by 2028. There will probably be fast-charging outlets nationwide, just as there are gas stations today.
Already, homes in Atlanta must be built to accommodate electric vehicles.
Accessible cities
More people will live in cities, which produce far fewer greenhouse gasses per person than suburbs. The cities will be designed with the kind of human-friendly density being incorporated into plans across the globe.
Cities, which will have mostly apartment buildings and townhouses, will be walkable and have bike paths. Excellent mass transit will be available via electric buses and vans. Businesses and office buildings will be interspersed rather than plunked down miles out of town in office parks and malls.
People will choose space to spread out or cheaper land and housing, preferences made more sustainable because of the increasing ability to work from home or commute by electric vehicles.
Telecommuting for fun and profit
Work will be more integrated with living areas. Offices will  be built to high standards to reduce waste, save water and conserve energy.
More than 33,000 buildings in the USA have gotten LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) certification, marking them as highly efficient.
Not that everyone will go to an office every day. Telecommuting all or part of the time will become more common as the tools for doing so - fast Internet and good video connections - become cheaper, better and easier to use. More people will work from communal workspaces near their homes.
Big U.S. companies are beginning to do this. Amazon, Apple and Google have dozens of offices across the nation where people can work, so employees don't all need to move to Silicon Valley in California or to Seattle.
Many people are used to working from shared office spaces such as WeWork and ImpactHub.
Rethinking food
What's old will be new again in many ways when it comes to food and farming, experts said. The nation's food supply is likely to be fresher and more wholesome as growers and sellers become better at managing logistics to minimize travel time and loss.
"We've gotten into this mode that we expect to see blueberries and oranges every week of the year. As energy costs go higher and water becomes even in more short supply in the future, not every type of food will be available at every moment," said Robert Myers, a professor of agriculture at the University of Missouri in Columbia and an expert on climate change and sustainable agriculture.
Amanda Little, author of the forthcoming book "The Fate of Food: What We'll Eat in a Bigger, Hotter, Smarter World," said mankind will probably  eat the same kinds of food we eat today, but it will be produced differently and much more efficiently.
That's especially true of meat, which Little predicted will be either plant-based faux meat or vat-grown tissue that is identical to meat on a cellular level. "It's very inefficient to raise an entire animal just to eat the edible parts of it," she said.
Meat from animals, what we'll call "craft" or "specialty meat," will still be available.
Little said cell-based meat is closer than we realize. She had some vat-grown duck last week.
"It was chewy and greasy, but it tasted very meaty," she said. "For a very early stage lab meat product, it was very convincing."
Farms will look the same  as we drive by, but a closer look will show differences. Older practices, such as planting clover and other cover crops during the winter, will be more common to improve soil health, making the ground more able to withstand floods or drought and decrease the amount of fertilizer needed. Complex crop rotations, aided by computers, will make farming more efficient and cheaper because less fertilizer and pesticides will be required.
Fields might have drones buzzing over them or small robots running down the rows,  testing the soil for moisture and nutrients and  imaging the crops for weed or insect infestations. That information will be automatically fed to the farmer, who can use it to precisely water and care for each small land unit, rather than wasting expensive water and chemicals.
Those fields will probably incorporate wind turbines or solar panels to give growers additional income. Many farms in the Midwest  get rents of $3,000 to $5,000 per year to put turbines on their land, Apt said.
Energy for everyone
The world's air and water will be cleaner  once we stop using polluting energy sources. The planet's resources will become more equitable as carbon-neutral energy sources become cheaper and more efficient, which will make  them available to people in parts of the world where energy is  expensive and difficult to obtain.
It's all doable - no breakthroughs required, Stanford's Diffenbaugh said:  "The knowledge necessary for getting on that path is available."
What would life be like if we solved climate change? Better than today or worse? Mud huts and gruel, or flying cars and the Jetsons?  Comfy homes, good food, whip-smart appliances and robots hopping around on farms all seem pretty likely, experts queried by USA TODAY said. All in all, our living standard would be the same, only a lot greener and more efficient.  Their view is in stark contrast to a common complaint by those who object to making global-warming-based changes to the economy, suggesting such changes would destroy America's standard of living and force everyone to "live in yurts and eat tofu," as one commenter put it. 



Climate change is visible in these 10 places



Earth Day, the annual celebration to support environmental protection, falls on Monday, but for travelers, every day can offer a chance to learn about the planet.
As the climate changes across the globe, some tourism spots are in flux, says Mike Gunter Jr., a professor at Rollins College in Winter Park, Florida. In his new book, "Tales of an Ecotourist: What Travel to Wild Places Can Teach Us about Climate Change" (SUNY Press, $25.95), he aims to break through misunderstandings.
"It tells stories about climate change underway and stories about amazing places," Gunter says. "It's a call to learn from travel."
He shares some examples:
Galapagos Islands, Ecuador
El Nio, a cyclical pattern of Pacific storms caused by warm water, has become stronger in recent years, researchers say. That has affected the famed Ecuadorian islands known for bird, reptile and sea life. "The El Nio years can be more intense," Gunter says. The change has even affected finches, which have evolved in a few years to adapt to the changing environment. galapagos.org
Dead Sea, Israel and Jordan
The lowest place on earth is shrinking, Gunter says. In the past 40 years, the famed salt-laden sea has diminished by a third and dropped 80 feet. Much of the change is due to increased use of water for irrigation from the Jordan River. "That's the key component," Gunter says. visitjordan.com
Venice, Italy
Flooding has long plagued the famed canal city, but it has intensified in recent years, and some areas are regularly inundated at peak high tides.
"It's a regular event, it's not just something hypothetical that we're anticipating," Gunter says. The city is developing plans to build flood walls and other barriers to keep the sea at bay. veneziaunica.it/en
Fairbanks, Alaska
A drunken forest may sound like something out of a "Harry Potter" book, but in fact, it's a change caused by rising temperatures. As permafrost, the layer of permanently frozen ground, disappears in Alaska, trees begin to tilt. "There are forests that are leaning like a hurricane blew them. They look like they've had too much to drink," Gunter says. explorefairbanks.com
Antarctic Peninsula
When climate changes, not all species react the same way. On the southern continent, gentoo penguins thrive because they build pebble nests on shorelines newly exposed by melting ice. Adelie penguins are having trouble because they fish from floating sea ice, which is less plentiful. "There are winners and losers," Gunter says. icecube.wisc.edu/pole/tourism
Greensburg, Kansas
Although not well-known, this south-central Kansas town is an environmental survivor, Gunter says. It was nearly destroyed by a tornado in 2007 but was rebuilt as one of the most eco-conscious places in the world. It was the first U.S. city to fully adopt LED street lights, and it gets 100% of its power from renewable energy.  "It's rebuilt itself stronger than before," Gunter says. greensburgks.org
Acadia National Park, Maine
Gunter worked with a scientist last year collecting data in the popular Atlantic Coast park. The area's lobster population is predicted to migrate north to seek cooler waters, as will the whales that pass by offshore. "You're seeing a shift in the types of species that exist there," Gunter says. nps.gov/acad
The Alps
Europe's famous mountain range still looms over the continent, but warming temperatures are taking their toll. Not only are its glaciers receding, but its plant life is changing as lowland species gain a foothold. "The Alps sit lower in elevation than the Rocky Mountains, so they're more susceptible," Gunter says. visiteurope.com/en/ destination/the-alps
Florida Keys
Coral reefs face pressure from warming water and a shift in the chemical composition of oceans that has bleached out color. "There's more carbon in the water," Gunter explains. "Some corals are more resilient than others. You'll see parts of a reef that look really good," but in others, change is noticeable. fla-keys.com
Glacier National Park, Montana
The glaciers that give the park its name have been in retreat for many years, peaking in the 19th century at the end of a period called the Little Ice Age. Since then, the number of glaciers in the park has dropped from about 150 to several dozen. "It's striking," Gunter says. nps.gov/glac 



Some 2020 Dems warm up to nuclear; Clean-energy option finds unlikely support



WASHINGTON - Nuclear energy could be making a comeback thanks to ... Democrats?
Several candidates vying for the party's presidential nomination in 2020 are promoting or have shown openness to expanding "next generation" nuclear power as part of the arsenal of options to aggressively address the effects of climate change.
Sen. Cory Booker, D-N.J.; Rep. John Delaney, D-Md.; and Sen. Amy Klobuchar, D-Minn. are backing expansion of modern nuclear energy that would have to meet tougher safety standards. Several other White House candidates, including former Colorado Gov. John Hickenlooper; Rep. Tim Ryan, D-Ohio; and Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass., have signaled they are open to the idea of nuclear power but have not pushed it as part of their agendas.
Even the Green New Deal, New York Democrat Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's sweeping social justice proposal to combat climate change, doesn't rule out nuclear power expansion despite a draft recommendation initially calling for the decommissioning of all of the nation's nuclear reactors within a decade.
It seems a strange turn for a party that not long ago fiercely opposed the industry. But the call for rapid decarbonization of the atmosphere to remedy a warming planet means nuclear power is at least getting a second look.
"It's a pragmatic position," said Sam Ori, executive director at the Energy Policy Institute at the University of Chicago. "I'm not surprised that there's a set of national policymakers who are taking progressive positions on dealing with climate change and including nuclear in that."
The support for nuclear power isn't often loud or well-laid-out publicly. Instead, it's sold in more subtle language as part of an "all of the above" strategy.
Washington Gov. Jay Inslee, who has made his presidential campaign chiefly about solving climate change, said he is focusing "first and foremost" on expanding renewable alternatives such as wind and solar, improved efficiency, a smarter power grid and energy storage technologies.
But "we should continue to explore next-generation advanced nuclear technologies," the governor said in a statement provided to USA TODAY.
Not every candidate seeking the Democratic presidential nomination in 2020 is a fan, mirroring a similar divide in the environmental community.
Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., a leading candidate for the nomination, opposes renewing existing licenses because "the toxic waste byproducts of nuclear plants are not worth the risks of the technology's benefit." Sen. Kamala Harris, D-Calif.; Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand, D-N.Y.; and Rep. Tulsi Gabbard, D-Hawaii., are among those who oppose including nuclear technology on  the clean energy menu.
Nuclear power, generated by 98 commercial reactors at 60 plants scattered across 30 states, provides nearly 20% of the nation's electricity, according to government figures. That makes nuclear the largest single supplier of carbon-free energy in the U.S.
Yet economic factors, mainly from the production of cheap natural gas and increasingly affordable renewable sources, are slowly driving nuclear power out of business. In addition, diminished demand has hurt profitability, as have rising costs to operate the plants, analysts say.
President Donald Trump, a climate change skeptic whose administration has championed fossil fuels such as oil and coal, signed legislation in 2018 to expand the nuclear industry.
Only one new nuclear power plant has come online in the United States since 2010: The Watts Bar Unit 2 in Tennessee, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration. Two more reactors are under construction in Georgia, according to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
But six reactors at five plants have been mothballed since 2013, seven others at five more plants are slated to retire over the next seven years, and another five reactors at four more plants are expected to close in the next few years if they do not receive new financial support, according to a report from the Union of Concerned Scientists.
Safety remains a major concern as well, 40 years after Three Mile Island's Unit 2 suffered a partial meltdown in what remains the nation's worst commercial nuclear accident. The threat of a terrorist attack and the potential damage from a major hurricane (nuclear plants sit on or near bodies of water) have added to the angst. And there's the question of finding a permanent repository for nuclear waste, a question that has bedeviled for years.
Ori, the University of Chicago analyst, said the center-left - which advocates considering nuclear energy - remains a powerful voice in the Democratic Party.
"But that doesn't mean eventually that this policy isn't going to run into the strong resistance to nuclear from the farther left of the party and from the dominant voices in the climate policy movement," he said. "Eventually those things are going to collide." 



California restaurants add climate change tax; Money goes to farmers to help them reduce carbon dioxide



Eating out is already getting more expensive, as restaurants nationwide raise prices to cover rising rents and employee costs.
Now, some California diners will get hit with a climate change tax.
Spurred by a Bay Area restaurateur, eateries across the state will have the option this fall of joining the Restore California Renewable Restaurant program, which adds 1% to the bill.
The program is optional for restaurants and consumers alike. Funds from the initiative go to help farmers make changes in their fields that would help capture carbon dioxide. CO2 is considered  among the chief contributors to climate change.
"Across the country, restaurants are an $800 billion business and represent 1 in 10 U.S. workers, which is too much money and people to not be part of the solution," says Anthony Myint, co-founder of Mission Chinese, a local restaurant that has been adding an optional 3% surcharge to its bills since last summer.
The new initiative comes against a backdrop of rising dining prices. In January, full-service restaurant prices were up 2.7 percent from a year earlier, well above the 1.6 percent annual rise for inflation overall, according to the consumer price index.
But Myint is convinced adding a few cents to a bill for a good cause won't make customers balk.
"Since we started adding 3% last summer, zero people have opted out," he says.
The genesis of the new tax is Myint's deep passion for combining entrepreneurship with social activism. A few years ago, he started the Perennial Farming Initiative, a non-profit aimed at helping restaurant owners go carbon neutral -- which means finding ways to offset the carbon dioxide produced by a business by investing in enterprises that take CO2 out of the atmosphere.
So far, 25 restaurants globally have signed on to the initiative's so-called Zero Foodprint pledge. On a $50 check, a 3% surcharge would be $1.50, and a 1% charge is 50 cents.
California has long been on the forefront of ecological issues, from land conservation to early solar power adoption. State leaders, including Gov. Gavin Newsom, have vowed to make the state carbon neutral by 2045.
For restaurant owners, the easiest way to help with carbon sequestration is to help farmers adopt measures, often initially costly, to make their fields retain rather than emit carbon. These include adding compost to improve soil health, planting cover crops in between cash crops, and planting hedgerows with woody plants that store carbon in their roots.
"Ingredients represent 65% of where an average restaurant's carbon footprint lies," Myint says. "So you have to look carefully at how the ingredients you use are produced."
Myint's local effort went statewide after he connected with officials from the California Air Resources Board and the California Department of Food and Agriculture during a Global Action Climate Summit here last September.
"Anthony wanted to provide even more confidence to his customers around where this surcharge was going, so he approached CARB and us about a collaboration," says Karen Ross, secretary of the state's Department of Food and Agriculture.
"The state uses its expertise around carbon sequestration farming practices we've vetted, to do that accounting and add transparency.
"This could maybe serve as a model for other businesses and investors to use their buying power to do similar things."
To receive a government cap and trade grant, farmers can apply directly for funds in exchange for committing to actions that include upgrading old farming equipment and installing renewable energy power options.
In contrast, the new 1% climate change tax would give restaurant owners the ability to distribute the funds directly to growers that they work with for their produce.
Myiant, who also has Mission Chinese locations in New York, says that if 1% of California's nearly 100,000 restaurants were to successfully adopt the new climate change surcharge,  $10 million a year would be raised.
Those funds would supplement a variety of existing California programs that farmers can avail themselves of when trying to improve the health of their soil, says Renata Brillinger, executive director of CalCAN, the California Climate & Agriculture Network, a coalition of sustainable agriculture organizations.
"Over the last 50 years, farms moved toward the chemical management of their fields, which resulted in a series of air, water and climate problems," Brillinger says.
"But now, we here in California, and in other parts of the country, are seeing consumer taking more interest in where their food comes from and how it's grown. Restaurants are driven often by consumer trends, so this new optional tax should appeal."
Just how the state's restaurants will react remains to be seen.
"It's too early days," says Sharokina Shams, vice president of public affairs for the California Restaurant Association.
"These days, bill surcharges are nothing new, whether its to help with employee pay and benefits or for a cause like the wildfires. So this seems like a group of well-intentioned people finding another way to use a surcharge.
"California restaurants ring up 10 million transactions a day, so working through them can be an effective way to raise consumer awareness." 



House OKs bill to keep US in Paris climate deal; GOP opposition likely to doom measure in Senate



WASHINGTON - It's not as bold as the Green New Deal, but House Democrats passed climate legislation Thursday that would prevent the Trump administration from exiting the international Paris Agreement aimed at global warming.
"It's time to end denial about (climate change) and start listening to the facts. This is about science, science, science," House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., said on the House floor Thursday before the vote. "An overwhelming number of Americans know this is a crisis, they know that human behavior has an impact on it and they want us to act."
The House passed the Climate Action Now Act 231-190, largely along party lines. That's almost certainly as far as the bill will get. Senate Republicans, who have shown little willingness to break ranks with President Donald Trump on energy policy, are unlikely to take up the House bill.
The Climate Action Now bill would bar the administration from using federal funds to withdraw from the international treaty, which Trump called "onerous" and "harsh" during a Rose Garden news conference in 2017. Trump said America would withdraw from the agreement, but the United States can't officially do so until 2020.
The legislation would require the administration to develop and submit to Congress a plan that meets its obligation under the Paris accord to cut greenhouse gas emissions by 2025. That commitment calls on the USA to cut emissions warming the planet by 26% to 28% below 2005 levels.
The measure is considerably less ambitious than the Green New Deal, the sweeping proposal from Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, D-N.Y., that calls for shifting completely from fossil fuels to renewable energy in the coming years and prescribes a broad platform that included free housing, medical coverage and higher education for all Americans.
Democratic House leaders are lukewarm on the Green New Deal; some are worried that its hard turn to the left could repel voters in 2020.
"Speaker Pelosi knows very likely that to have a vote on the Green New Deal could cost the Democrats the majority," said Rep. Jody Hice, R-Ga. 



Study: Earth's oceans could rise 6 feet by 2100; Global warming could swamp coastal cities



Miami? Underwater. Norfolk, Virginia? Swamped. New York City? Fuggedaboutit.
Top experts say that in a worst-case scenario, portions of these and other U.S. coastal cities could be lost to the sea by the end of the century as ocean levels rise because of global warming, a study released Monday said. In fact, on average, seas around the world could be as much as 6.5 feet higher by the end of the century if climate change continues unchecked.
A group of 22 top scientists came up with the estimate by using new techniques to measure how  ice will melt in the world's polar regions. The primary cause of the rising seas will be the  melt of the gigantic ice sheets on Greenland and Antarctica.
While  it's a high-end estimate, "we should not rule out a sea-level rise of over  2 meters (6.5 feet) if we continue along a business-as-usual emissions trajectory," said study lead author Jonathan Bamber of the University of Bristol in the United Kingdom.
That's potentially twice the upper limit suggested by the United Nations' climate science panel's last major report, according to the magazine New Scientist.
Man-made climate change, or global warming, is caused by the burning of fossil fuels such as gas, coal and oil, which release  gases such as carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane into the atmosphere. The extra CO2 causes temperatures of the atmosphere and oceans to rise to levels that can't be explained by natural causes.
Low-lying coastal cities are most vulnerable to rising seas, Bamber said. They include cities in Florida and Louisiana, along with California cities such as Los Angeles and the Bay Area of San Francisco.
Worldwide, "such a rise in global sea level could result in a land loss of almost 700,000 square miles," he said. That's equivalent to an area more than three times as large as the state of California.
Other  global cities that could be partially lost to the sea include London and Rio de Janiero.
Such a rise in water levels also would swamp "critical regions of food production, and potential displacement of up to 187 million people," which is about 2.5% of the Earth's population.
"A sea-level rise of this magnitude would clearly have profound consequences for humanity," Bamber said.
And yes, the seas have risen and fallen many times before. What's new is the enormity of coastal development that will need to be protected, moved or abandoned.
Sea level has risen nearly 8 inches worldwide since 1880 but, unlike water in a bathtub, it doesn't rise evenly.
In the past 100 years, it has climbed about a foot or more for some U.S. cities because of ocean currents and land subsidence - 11 inches in New York and Boston, 12 in Charleston, 16 in Atlantic City, 18 in Norfolk and 25 in Galveston, Texas, according to a recent USA TODAY analysis of tide gauge data collected by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Scientists say global warming will be the primary cause of future sea-level rise. Their greatest uncertainty is how quickly the massive West Antarctic ice sheet will melt. 



Carbon dioxide back at record levels; Study says reading is highest in 3 million years



Carbon dioxide - the gas scientists say is most responsible for global warming - peaked again at record levels last month, according to a study.
Levels at Hawaii's Mauna Loa Observatory averaged 414.8 parts per million in May, surging past yet another climate milestone. This level hasn't been seen in human history and is higher than at any other point in 3 million years, according to a study in the peer-reviewed journal Science Advances.
The concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere increases every year, and the rate of increase is accelerating, according to scientists from the Scripps Institution of Oceanography and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
This is the highest seasonal peak recorded in 61 years of observations on top of Hawaii's largest volcano, and the seventh consecutive year of steep global increases in concentrations of CO2. The 2019 peak value was 3.5 parts per million higher than the 411.3 ppm peak reached in May 2018; this is the second-highest annual jump on record.
Though 414 parts per million may not sound like a huge amount, scientists have known for decades that even trace amounts in the atmosphere can raise temperatures around the world.
The burning of fossil fuels such as coal and gas releases greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane into Earth's atmosphere and oceans. That extra carbon has caused temperatures to rise to levels over the past century and a half that cannot be explained by natural factors, scientists say.
In the past 20 years, the world's temperature has risen about two-thirds of a degree Fahrenheit, NOAA said.
"Many proposals have been made to mitigate global warming, but without a rapid decrease of CO2 emissions from fossil fuels, they are pretty much futile," said Pieter Tans, senior scientist with NOAA's global monitoring division.
Carbon dioxide is called a greenhouse gas for its ability to trap solar radiation in the atmosphere. It is invisible, odorless and colorless, yet is responsible for 63% of the warming attributable to all greenhouse gases, according to NOAA's Earth System Research Laboratory in Boulder, Colorado.
Levels of carbon dioxide go up and down each year, reaching their highest levels in May, then going back down in the fall as plants absorb the gas. 



'Fate of Food' explores lab-grown meat, GMOs



As the world heats up and the worldwide population increases, Amanda Little wonders how we'll feed humanity.
The bad news: There is no single silver-bullet answer.
The better news: There are many smart people working on many potential solutions.
Little's book, "The Fate of Food: What We'll Eat in a Bigger, Hotter, Smarter World" (Harmony, 340 pp.), out now,  landed just after an Australian policy paper warned the climate change apocalypse could start by 2050 if humans don't act.
The journalist and Vanderbilt University professor spent four years researching what countries, people, businesses and organizations around the globe are doing to ensure sustainability for the world's food supply.
"Three decades from now, if we're going to have a healthy, secure food supply, it will require a much larger, more deliberate network of participants, nationally and globally," Little writes.
Here are six things we learned from the "The Fate of Food":
The problems to solve vary around the world
The underlying global issues are too many mouths to feed - the United Nations predicts the world's population will be 9.8 billion by 2050 - and climate change.
But how those macro questions play out around the globe and in rural vs. urban areas varies.
In China, for instance, Little found that the country's infrastructure doesn't support transporting crops long distances, so that means farms are concentrated in greenbelts just outside urban centers. But pollution from those areas creates huge problems with contaminated soil, air and water.
In the United States, she notes that as the Midwest and Northeast experience freak freezes and wetter springs that kill off crops, the Southwest faces heat waves, forest fires and punishing droughts, which also kill off crops.
And some countries, most notably in Africa, already are experiencing famine, so they're looking to the fastest, most economical way to feed their population, including turning to genetically modified crops.
GMOs are at the center of the debate
Genetically modified organisms, more commonly known as GMOs, are polarizing. Plants can be genetically engineered to develop a resistance against insects or tolerate drought, but critics are concerned about potential health and environmental effects.
But as Little writes, "Outside the United States and especially in emerging economies, the debate around technology and agriculture - including GMOs - is not about better labeling for corn chips, or even about corporate control of the food system, it's about progress and, ultimately, survival."
In her visit to Kenya, she heard of countless maize crops wiped out by insects and drought, yet crops featuring gene-altered seeds from Monsanto were thriving. And maize, which is packed with calories, is critical to survival in the famished country.
Technology is key
Even more promising perhaps, and certainly less controversial, is robotics.
Imagine: Soldiers in the field getting 3D-printed meals personalized to their needs and delivered by drones. The Army told Little that may not be too far off.
Many technological solutions are being explored and are underway to solve one of Little's burning questions: "How will we produce affordable food for billions of people in the coming decades with a much lower volume of chemicals?"
From farm equipment that uses artificial intelligence to treat plants individually and ultimately cut down on chemicals to vertical farming with precision tools that can make organic farming more scalable, Little highlights critical technological advancements in modern farming. But she also highlights potential problems, namely cost.
Minimizing food waste could go a long way
One thing that could save money is minimizing food waste, both on an individual level and on a larger scale.
Much of what is thrown away by grocery stores can be donated, recycled or composted. And Little found that nearly every major food retailer has introduced a waste-reduction program.
In her research into Kroger, which aims to eliminate food waste from its stores by 2025, she found that each of the chain's 2,800 supermarkets produces tons of trash each week, mostly perishable foods that have reached sell-by dates but are still safe to eat.
"If food waste around the world was a country, it would rank third behind China and the U.S. in terms of greenhouse gas emissions," Darby Hoover, a waste researcher with the San Francisco office of the environmental group Natural Resources Defense Council, tells Little.
Water is paramount
This seems obvious but is one of the biggest issues as drought patterns intensify across the globe.
In a visit to Israel, Little saw progress with sensors that were able to minimize water system leaks and, ultimately, water waste. Other areas of progress and possible expansion areas include desalination plants that make ocean water suitable for drinking and irrigation, and advances in toilet-to-tap water treatment - advanced filtration to convert sewage into pure water.
Little ponders whether we could we get to the point where 100% of water that goes down the drain is recycled? Maybe in a few decades.
Main sources of protein may shift
The negative environmental impacts of meat production, particularly raising beef, have been widely documented.
Little digs into options for alternative protein sources, including seafood, but it has its own sustainability issues: sea lice, fish excrement and the toll on the wild fish population. Closed containment aquaculture could eliminate parasites and cut down on waste, disease and escapes, but the technology is costly and complex.
Other meat alternatives, such as the Impossible Burger, a plant-based patty, have been growing and bear watching.
But beef could still be what's for dinner with cultured meats grown in a lab using cells taken from living animals that renew and replicate themselves. It's not alive, it's just meat.
Lab meat could reduce greenhouse gas emissions, water use and bacterial contamination, as well as the risk of heart disease and obesity.
The cell-to-fork process takes two to six weeks, considerably shorter than the more than two years it takes to grow cattle from conception to maturity, which ultimately could result in cost, time and energy savings. But research still is in its infancy and the process currently costs thousands of dollars per pound, though Finless Foods claims it could release cultured bluefin tuna by late this year.
Although it's unlikely that cultured meats will fully replace farm-raised meat in the near term, they could eventually become a substantial part of the meat market. 



Climate change may endanger your dog; Insect pests and diseases they carry spread into new parts of USA



SAN FRANCISCO - As if storms, floods and heat waves weren't enough, some experts fear climate change is expanding the distribution of diseases that can sicken or even kill dogs, putting more pets at risk for diseases their owners have never had to deal with before.
Troubling trends
Some types of ticks live in areas of the USA where they were previously unheard of.
Though the peak of the summer season is becoming too hot for ticks, they're able to survive longer during the rest of the year.
Heartworm larvae - the contagious stage - are able to mature faster. In 82-degree weather, they mature in 11 to 12 days as opposed to 16 to 20 days in 71-degree weather.
Though diseases in dogs are not tracked as intensively as those in humans, veterinary epidemiologists and biologists said Rocky Mountain spotted fever, a bacterial disease that can cause fever, joint pain and vomiting, is moving into California and Texas. Heartworm disease, which can damage the cardiovascular system and clog the heart, is spreading beyond its traditional home in the South and Southeast. Lyme disease, which can cause joint swelling and lameness, affects dogs as far north as Canada.
"The veterinarians need to know what's local. But what's out there is changing so fast, how are you going to keep up?" said Janet Foley, a professor of epidemiology at the School of Veterinary Medicine of the University of California, Davis.
Many of these diseases also affect humans. But dogs are especially at risk because they spend a lot of time outdoors and in vegetation.
Warren Hess, assistant director of the American Veterinary Medical Association, said the spread of heartworm disease is increasing because of the changes in how frequently dogs are moved across the country.
"With the increased social pressure to restrict the sale of dogs in pet stores, this has resulted in a dramatic increase in the movement of dogs from pet shelters to fill the demand," he said.
Natural disasters also play a part. "The biggest spread in heartworm disease in the United States certainly followed the 2005 national distribution of dogs due to Hurricane Katrina," said Hess, whose responsibilities include disaster preparedness.
He said that although climate change is happening, and will continue to happen, "it is important that we properly frame the discussions and use all available science as we further the discussion."
Linking the expansion or shift of ticks that carry diseases, infection rates and dog populations is not an easy task. There are no mandated reporting requirements as there are for some human diseases. Data on tick and mosquito distribution is piecemeal in many areas. Tests for some of the diseases  didn't exist 10 years ago, so it's difficult to judge their historic range.
Even so, many scientists see patterns and links that point them toward climate change.
More ticks
"There's no smoking gun, and there will never be a smoking gun. We're trying to connect two things that operate at very different scales both in time and space," said Ram Raghavan, a professor of spatial epidemiology at the College of Veterinary Medicine at Kansas State University in Manhattan, Kansas.
He documented significant changes to the tick populations in the Midwest - in infestation intensity, the areas and when ticks are active. His team's surveillance in western parts of Kansas and Oklahoma found Lone Star ticks that didn't use to live there. These ticks can carry ehrlichiosis, a disease that in dogs can cause bruising of the gums, bleeding from the nose and lameness.
"There is this belief that these ticks do not exist in these areas, but increasingly over the last five years, we're constantly finding them. So I'm pretty sure they've expanded" their habitat, he said. "Tick-borne diseases have really gone up. We go out into the field, and we see and find ticks more easily than we used to do in the past."
To get to the bottom of it will require data that doesn't exist. Raghavan has written several grant proposals to the U.S. National Institutes of Health for funding to do long-term studies, broad testing and analysis.
"Regardless of who caused climate change, climate has changed. Let's take the emotion out of the debate and get some answers," he said.
Temperatures in the contiguous USA are on average 1.5 degrees warmer than they were the century before, according to the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Rainfall and humidity levels have changed in some areas. All of these factors affect where insects that can carry disease thrive.
Veterinarians and biologists who study diseases spread by insects observed that it's not just where but when the diseases strike that's changing.
"Diseases like Lyme disease that used to be transmitted in the peak summer months could now be peaking in the spring and fall because it's too hot in the summer. So you get a longer transmission window," said Andrew Dobson, a professor of ecology and evolutionary biology at Princeton University in New Jersey.
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, a disease carried by ticks,  can sicken and even kill humans and their canine companions. The bacteria initially invades the bloodstream, then settles into the cells that line blood vessels. Blood can seep out of the vessels and pool under the skin or even in the brain. The disease can be treated with antibiotics if caught in time.
At UC Davis, Foley studies its spread. Historically, most cases were spread by the American dog tick and occurred in the southern Atlantic states and the south-central states. North Carolina and Oklahoma accounted for the largest proportion.
Foley has tracked a new tick strain making its way north. This tropical strain of the brown dog tick has been found in many parts of the world and is known in the USA in Florida, Texas, Arizona and Southern California, where it may have been introduced from Brazil and Mexico. It can carry Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Cases are appearing along the U.S.-Mexican border in areas that have never had to deal with the disease before. The new tick has gotten as far north as Los Angeles. Foley expects it to make its way up through California's Central Valley as far north as Sacramento.
It's much more aggressive than tick species Americans are used to.
"It bites more, the hotter it gets. So the hotter it is, the more infections there are," Foley said.
Heartworm cases
The parasitic worms called Dirofilaria immitis are spread through the bite of a mosquito that carries them in a larval state. They cause an especially grisly disease. Once a dog is infected with the heartworm larva, it can grow into a foot-long parasitic worm that invades the dog's cardiovascular system, damages the arteries that carry blood from the heart to the lungs and blocks blood flow to the lungs by their presence and the clots they can cause.
To spread from one dog to another, the larvae have to develop to a specific infective stage inside the mosquito. The hotter it gets, the more quickly the larvae mature into a form that can transfer from the mosquitoes to the dogs. When it's 71 degrees out, that process can take 16 to 20 days. If it's 82 degrees, it takes 11 to 12 days, said Bruce Kornreich, a cardiologist and professor of veterinary medicine at the Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine in New York.
Heartworm disease has historically been a problem in the South and Southeast. Environments farther north are now able to support the mosquitoes that transmit it and the larvae that cause it.
Infections are rising. From 2013 to 2016, there was a 21.7% increase in heartworm infections in the number of dogs per veterinary clinic testing positive for heartworms, said Christopher Rehm, a veterinarian who practices in Mobile, Alabama, and is president of the American Heartworm Society.
There are no solid figures on how many dogs heartworms kill each year, but untreated infections shorten a dog's lifespan.
Even if heartworm disease is caught and treated in time, it takes its toll on dogs. "Once they've ever had a heart infection, they're never the same," Rehm said.
Lyme disease
On top of being an enormous health hazard to humans, Lyme disease can harm dogs, causing lameness, fever and lethargy. It's carried primarily by the blacklegged tick, or deer tick, in the Northeast and the western blacklegged tick in the South.
Both are on the move.
"With Ixodes (blacklegged ticks) moving northward from the United States into Canada, it's a clear example of how things are changing," said Michael Yabsley, a professor in the College of Veterinary Medicine at the University of Georgia in Athens.
Even as Lyme disease moves north, it's not decreasing in its historic area. In fact, infection rates in dogs are getting worse, said Yabsley, who studies wildlife diseases.
In 2018 in Columbia County, New York, 30% of dogs tested were positive for Lyme disease, according to data collected by the Companion Animal Parasite Council. 



Poll: Health care tops Dem wish list; Voters looking beyond Trump in debates



Democratic voters will be paying close attention to the opening candidate debates next week, and they have strong views about what they want discussed.
Hint: It's not Donald Trump.
Health care, immigration, the economy, climate change, education and taxes top the list of issues Democrats told a USA TODAY/Suffolk University Poll they want to hear about in the two-night, 20-candidate debate marathon in Miami. President Trump, including efforts to get him out of the White House, ranked eighth in responses to the open-ended question, named by just 4%.  Fewer than 1%  cited "election interference."
"One of the key things is global warming; this is like the biggest issue of our lifetime," said respondent Ethan Raboin, 29, a college student in Manchester, New Hampshire.
Carlos Sandi, 46, of Gainesville, Georgia, said he is looking for a candidate who is "connected to the real issues that ordinary Americans face, not trigger issues that spike elections."
Nearly every Democratic voter in the poll called the debates crucial to sorting out a record field of contenders. An overwhelming majority, 82%, said they'll be watching, and 86% said the debates will be important in determining whom  they'll support. More than half, 54%, called them "very important."
"It's kind of a dog-and-pony show," Jacob Cushman, 38, a registered nurse from Naples, Fla., said in a follow-up interview, but "hopefully it'll whittle down the candidates."
The survey gave Joe Biden a big lead, but it could be a fragile one. Thirty percent of those likely to vote in Democratic primaries and caucuses said they were supporting or leaning toward the former vice president. Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders was second at 15%, Massachusetts Sen. Elizabeth Warren third at 10%, South Bend Mayor Pete Buttigieg fourth at 9% and California Sen. Kamala Harris fifth at 8%. The only other candidates backed by more than 1% were New Jersey Sen. Cory Booker at 2%, and former Obama Cabinet member Julian Castro and former Colorado governor John Hickenlooper at 1% each.
"There might be some flaming response from someone who just strikes me and I have no idea he would, and it would change my mind," said Edna Wilcock, 72, a retired pediatric nurse from Sequim, Washington, who now supports Biden. "That's why we have all these debates."
The poll of 1,000 registered voters was taken June 11-15. The margin of error was three percentage points for the full sample, five points for the sample of 385 respondents who said they were likely to vote in Democratic primaries or caucuses, and four points for the combined sample of 618 Democrats and independents.
At the moment Americans are inclined to believe Trump, who formally kicked off his reelection campaign Tuesday night in Orlando with a rally before thousands of  supporters, will win a second term. In the survey, voters by 49%-38% predicted Trump would prevail over an unnamed Democratic nominee. That included 86% of Republicans and 14% of Democrats.
The  debates  loom as a test for the better-known candidates and a chance for the more obscure ones. More than half of the Democratic voters said they had never heard of six of the 20 candidates who qualified to participate.
"This is going to be an introduction to those people who will actually watch the debate for a whole group of new, fresh faces," said Rand Hoch, 64, a retired judge from West Palm Beach, Florida.
Many of the voters said they were struggling to decide between the candidate they liked best and the one they calculated would have the best chance of winning  in November 2020.
"When it comes to policy and just smarts, Elizabeth Warren outshines pretty much everyone, but then I weigh with that, do I think she could get elected?" said Tanae McLean, 48, of Mooresville, North Carolina. "If you go by polling, obviously Joe Biden's a front-runner. Do I think he has the best ideas? I love Joe Biden, but no. ...
"I'm definitely open-minded at this point." 



Climate change 'real risk,' nominee says; Trump UN pick breaks with the White House



WASHINGTON - President Donald Trump's nominee to be United Nations ambassador publicly broke with the White House over climate change on Wednesday, calling it a "real risk" and promising to take the issue seriously if confirmed to the high-profile diplomatic position.
The statement by Kelly Knight Craft - made during a contentious Senate confirmation hearing - marked a sharp reversal from her previous comments, in which she said she believed "both sides" of the science on climate change.
"Climate change needs to be addressed as it poses real risk to our planet," Craft, the U.S. ambassador to Canada, said in opening remarks before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
"Let there be no doubt" that human behavior is contributing to global warming, she added. "I will be an advocate in addressing climate change," Craft promised, although she also said the United States should not shoulder an "outsized burden" in curbing greenhouse gas emissions.
Craft's statement was particularly remarkable because of her family ties to the coal industry and because Trump has questioned whether climate change is man-made.
Craft is a top Republican donor from Kentucky, and her billionaire husband, Joseph Craft III, is the president and CEO of Alliance Resource Partners, a major U.S. coal company. Trump tapped Craft for the U.N. post at the urging of Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky.
Craft and her husband donated $1million to Trump's inauguration in 2016, according to the Center for Responsive Politics, a nonpartisan group that tracks money in politics. The center's data show that Alliance Resource Partners, through its employees and other associated entities, have donated more than $5 million to federal candidates since 2010 - almost exclusively to Republicans, including several GOP members of the Foreign Relations Committee.
Campaign donors are often rewarded with plum ambassador posts. Craft's supporters say she is well qualified for the job, pointing in part to her tenure in Canada, where she helped navigate the contentious trade negotiations that led to a new agreement to replace the North American Free Trade Agreement, or NAFTA.
McConnell introduced Craft at Wednesday's hearing, calling her a distinguished stateswoman and leader who has "the knowledge, talent and experience" to represent the U.S. at the United Nations.
It's not clear if Craft's reversal on climate change will be enough to assuage Senate Democrats, who sharply questioned her commitment to confronting an issue that tops the United Nations' agenda.
Craft sparked ridicule and outrage when she claimed to believe scientists on "both sides" of the climate change debate in a 2017 interview with Canada's CBC television network.
"I believe there are scientists on both sides that are accurate," Craft said when asked if she believed in climate change.
Pressed on whether she believes humans are not contributing to climate change, she said then: "Well, I think that both sides have, you know, their own results from their studies, and I appreciate and respect both sides of the science."
Wednesday's hearing comes more than six months after Trump's first U.N. ambassador, Nikki Haley, left the administration. Trump initially tapped Heather Nauert, a former Fox News host and State Department spokeswoman, to replace Haley. But Nauert withdrew amid questions about her qualifications for the high-profile position. 



Trump power plan keeps coal stoked; Environmentalists warn of ruinous effects



WASHINGTON - President Donald Trump is keeping a signature campaign promise to boost the coal industry, but environmentalists say the energy plan his administration  rolled out Wednesday would lead to premature deaths, increase the risk of lung disease and hasten climate change.
The Affordable Clean Energy (ACE) rule, an amendment to the Clean Air Act, is likely to extend the lives of potentially scores of aging coal-fired power plants across the country whose carbon emissions are blamed for contributing to global warming.
It replaces the Clean Power Plan, President Barack Obama's aggressive strategy to confront climate change that never took effect after the Supreme Court prevented its implementation in 2016.
Obama's approach sought to shutter dozens of coal-fired power plants by forcing utilities to cut down on emissions of carbon, sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide that contribute to global warming.
Many of those plants are likely to operate longer under the Trump administration rule because it gives states and utilities flexibility to design a plan that proponents say will keep energy costs for coal plants and consumers low while gradually reducing carbon emissions.
Under ACE, states have three years to submit a plan to limit greenhouse gas emissions to the Environmental Protection Agency for review. The agency estimates that 600 coal-fired electric generation units at 300 facilities nationwide will be covered by the rule though officials could not say how many of them would run longer as a result.
The new rule, EPA Administrator Andrew Wheeler said, "gives states the regulatory certainty they need to continue to reduce emissions and provide affordable and reliable energy to all Americans."
Opponents argue it does little to confront the escalating dangers posed by climate change and will allow power plants to keep spewing air pollutants, such as soot, that lead to asthma and other lung-related diseases.
"As rising temperatures, surging seas and record-breaking natural disasters ravage communities everywhere, the Trump Administration continues to ignore science and put the interests of polluters ahead of the American people," House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., said in a statement.
Environmental groups and some states vowed to sue to stop the plan's implementation, just as opponents of Obama's Clean Power Plan did successfully four years ago.
"Like so many other Trump regulatory rollbacks, these new (ACE) rules will hit the wall in the courts," David Doniger of the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) wrote in a blog.
Trump has made reviving the coal industry a signature plank of his "Make America Great Again" agenda.
The issue could be a factor in the 2020 election in swing states, such as Ohio and Pennsylvania, where coal is still mined.
Labor Department statistics show that the industry workforce has risen slightly under his administration after hitting a low in 2016, Obama's last year in office.
Obama's Clean Power Plan was finalized in 2015, mainly targeting coal-fired  plants that account for nearly 40% of U.S. carbon dioxide emissions. It remains on hold under a Supreme Court stay, pending the outcome of a legal challenge from states.
Mandy Gunasekara, who worked on the ACE proposal  in the EPA until leaving the agency in February, said ACE has a better chance of improving air quality than the Clean Power Plan because it's more likely to survive a court challenge.
"For all the fanfare around the CPP, it achieved a total number of zero emission reductions due to Supreme Court intervention," said Gunasekara, who runs a nonprofit group called Energy45 to promote Trump's energy policies. "ACE establishes a cooperative framework whereby the federal government works alongside state government to advance environmental goals. For any honest environmentalist, this (is) something to be celebrated."
Conrad Schneider, advocacy director for the Clean Air Task Force, an environmental organization, said the Trump rule is misguided not only because it promotes bad policy but because the industry doesn't even want it. "It contemplates investing more money in old, dirty coal plants," he said. "The one thing they chose to base this rule on is the one thing that no one is doing. Nobody is putting money into old coal plants right now." 



Wealthy activist joins 2020 race



WASHINGTON - Tuesday morning, billionaire and activist Tom Steyer became the most recent Democrat to join the race for president.
In a video posted on YouTube, Steyer argues that his campaign aims to get money out of politics and address the impact of climate change.
"Almost every major single intractable problem, at the back of it, you see a big money interest for whom stopping progress, stopping justice is really important to their bottom line," he says.
Acknowledging his wealth, which Forbes estimates at $1.6 billion, Steyer says in the video that he signed the Giving Pledge, a "promise to give away half of your wealth while you're alive to good causes."
"Corporate money has corrupted our democracy and stripped Americans of our ability to determine our own future," Steyer said in a news release. "The only way for us to solve the urgent problems facing our country is to loosen the stranglehold that corporations have over our politicians and return political power to the American people."
Steyer gained national prominence at the helm of liberal advocacy groups such as Need to Impeach, which organizes grassroots efforts to impeach President Donald Trump and claims to have an email list of more than 8.2 million Americans. He leads NextGen America, a climate-oriented advocacy group.
In January, he said he would not join the presidential race, saying he would instead be "strengthening my commitment to Need to Impeach."
Republican National Committee spokesman Steve Guest  said Steyer would just "light more of his money on fire."
"After a false start, left-wing extremist Tom Steyer has finally formalized his self-promotion tour under the guise of a presidential campaign," Guest said. "The only thing Steyer's campaign will do is light more of his money on fire as he joins the rest of the 2020 Democrat field in pushing policies that are way outside the mainstream."
Steyer is one of 24 Democrats in the race, and he enters the race late, after the first Democratic presidential debate.  The next Democratic presidential debate will be  July 30 and July 31 in Detroit.
Monday afternoon, Rep. Eric Swalwell, D-Calif., dropped out of the presidential race, saying he would instead run for re-election to the House of Representatives. 



UN: Changing diet could help save land from climate change



Global warming on land is happening at a rapid rate, and humans will need to change the way they eat and farm to help save the planet, a new United Nations report says.
The report from the U.N. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change describes a cycle in which the problems of land degradation and climate change exacerbate each other to make land and climate less livable.
"The cycle is accelerating," NASA climate scientist Cynthia Rosenzweig, a report co-author, told The Associated Press. "The threat of climate change affecting people's food on their dinner table is increasing."
The review says climate change threatens our food supply "through increasing temperatures, changing precipitation patterns, and greater frequency of some extreme events."
The IPCC report, published Thursday and titled "Climate Change and Land," is the latest from scientists around the globe studying climate change and how humans can stop - or contribute to - global temperature increases.
U.N. countries agreed during the Paris climate change conference in 2015 that global temperature increases need to be kept below 2 degrees Centigrade to prevent the most catastrophic effects of climate change. That 2-degree measure is a conservative estimate,  and countries agreed to strive to keep the rise below 1.5 degrees. President Donald Trump announced in 2017 his decision to withdraw the United States from the Paris climate agreement.
"Warming over land has occurred at a faster rate than the global mean, and this has had observable impacts on the land system," the U.N. report authors wrote.
The report focuses on how farming and food production further the problem. The IPCC estimates that 25% to 30% of all greenhouse gas emissions come from food systems.
Changing the food we eat by switching to healthy and sustainable diets full of grains, fruits, vegetables and nuts could reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Meat is identified as "the single food with the greatest impact on the environment" in the report.
Food waste is identified as a major problem: About a third of all food produced is lost or wasted, according to the report. 



'Blinded' unleashes the healing power of The Boss



When the world turns crazy, you turn to The Boss.
From cultural strife and political turmoil to climate crises and child separation at the border, it's all pretty inescapable these days. Between the shootings in El Paso and Dayton, and potential threats that hit too close to home, there's a palpable feeling of unease that's hard to shake.
So how about powering off the talking heads and constant arguments on cable news, logging out of Twitter and going to see "Blinded by the Light" (***1/2; rated PG-13; in theaters nationwide Friday)? While the outside might still be a bit of a dumpster fire when you get out, it'll remind you of the importance of chasing dreams and loving yourself as well as others.
The big screen has always been used as a great escape, but director Gurinder Chadha's wonderfully feel-good film is different than the likes of an "Avengers: Endgame." Inspired by a very cool true story, "Blinded by the Light" features a relatable Pakistani Muslim teenager who has to save his own universe, facing problems in 1987 that are still very real in 2019, though he's powered heart and soul by the tunes of Bruce Springsteen.
The promised land of London feels so far away to Javed (Viveik Kalra) from his working-class hometown of Luton. He harbors dreams of being a poet and a writer, though he hasn't found his voice yet. He grows apart from his childhood best friend (Dean-Charles Chapman) as personalities and musical tastes change.
His traditional father (Kulvinder Ghir) works in a factory during a down economic time and can be overbearing - he wants Javed to study hard so he can get a good job, and views his son's writing as a "hobby." Javed sees xenophobia all around him, whether it's a skinhead spray painting "Pakis Out" on a wall or laughing little kids urinating through the mail slot of a family friend's home.
It's all a little much for Javed. But right when he needs it the most, Springsteen comes into his life - or, more accurately, gets dropped in front of him via cassette tape.
Javed meets Sikh classmate Roops (Aaron Phagura), a denim-clad, turban-wearing Springsteen acolyte who preaches the gospel of The Boss, and Javed instantly finds a deep connection with the American from Asbury Park, New Jersey: "It's like Bruce knows everything I've ever felt, everything I've ever wanted."
As Springsteen's words magically swirl around Javed onscreen and get ingrained in his spirit, he goes on a journey of self-discovery to find his place in this mixed-up world as well as within his own struggling, loving family.
That road is tough, too, as Javed's sister has a wedding day that coincides with the extreme-right National Front marching through the streets, brandishing closed fists and open hate, while equally defiant counterprotesters and innocent bystanders get caught in the melee.
The scene is a reminder of white nationalism's rise in present day and specifically the Charlottesville Unite the Right rally and death of Heather Heyer two years ago this week.
But "Blinded by the Light" combats anger with understanding and fights intolerance with joyful noise. When a writing contest gives Javed a chance to visit America - and drop by Asbury Park - he's greeted by a burly customs agent who's psyched the kid's hitting up Springsteen's hometown rather than giving him side eye.
It's safe to assume that when Springsteen wrote, "Everybody's got a hungry heart," he didn't have a certain skin color in mind. His music, the stuff that changes Javed's life, speaks to a legion of loyal fans and a newer generation who can relate to his infectious, revolutionary spirit of breaking free from what binds us. In that sense, "Blinded by the Light" isn't a cure-all, but could be a salve to those who could use the healing.
In one of the movie's most memorable scenes, Javed and his activist love interest Eliza (Nell Williams) embark on a glorious, mischievous romp out of school and through Luton, singing "Born to Run" and dancing with literally everyone who'll join them.
The song is an ode to that youthful yearning to escape toward something better, and these lines that Javed and his friends croon feel like a rallying cry for bringing us all together during divided times: "Together we could break this trap / We'll run till we drop, baby we'll never go back."
Who can argue when The Boss says so? 



Massive 'raft' of rock to the reef's rescue



A massive layer of volcanic rock carrying multitudes of sea organisms could soon aid in the recovery of the Great Barrier Reef, which has been "bleached" and permanently damaged by climate change.
The "raft" was captured by NASA Earth Observatory days after an underwater volcano 130 feet down may have erupted near the island of Tonga. The resulting raft of pumice rock is the size of Manhattan and is  floating toward Australia, NASA said.
Days later, an Australian couple sailing to Vanatu on a catamaran encountered the raft.
The sheer volume of the mass, made up of "pumice stones from marble to basketball size," blocked their ship.
"In the slick our steering became temporarily/partially fouled by rocks jamming between rudders and hull," they wrote in a dispatch posted to Facebook in August.
The "masses of lava" created by the eruption stay on the surface because "such pumice rocks are full of holes and cavities, and they easily float," NASA said.
"These chunks of pumice end up making excellent, drifting homes for sea organisms, helping them spread," said volcanologist Erik Klemetti in Discover.
Once the raft drifts into Australian waters, Queensland University of Technology geologist Scott Bryan tells the Australian Broadcasting Corp. that it will be covered in an array of sea organisms. Its arrival "will bring new healthy corals and other reef dwellers to the Great Barrier Reef," Bryan told the Guardian.
That, in effect, will help restore the Great Barrier Reef - which is the world's largest coral reef and the planet's biggest structure made by living organisms.
The reef has been compromised repeatedly by global warming, with die-offs happening at a rate that may cause it to not recover quickly enough. 



Climate change on center stage; Democrats' town hall caps big week for issue



There's perhaps no topic that more starkly divides Democratic hopefuls and President Donald Trump than the debate on climate change.
On voters' minds
74% of likely voters ages 18 to 29 disapprove of Trump's handling of climate change concerns
53% of likely voters agree that the government should do more to curb climate change even at the expense of economic growth.
Harvard University poll published in March
Democrats writ large see global warming as an existential crisis, while Trump has dismissed the issue.
Yet, until this week, global warming has remained largely on the back burner in an internal Democratic debate that has largely focused on who is best equipped to take on Trump in the general election and whether pursuing "Medicare for All" is the best way to fix health care in America.
That could be changing.
Top Democratic hopefuls this week tried to demonstrate how they would approach turning the tide on global warming should they become the next commander in chief.
"We see that now with Hurricane Dorian," said former Housing and Urban Development Secretary Julian Castro, who was among 10 leading Democrats invited by CNN to talk part in marathon climate town hall Wednesday and was among five Democrats this week to unveil a climate agenda. "The Arctic ice caps melting. The Amazon on fire. We don't need climate scientists to tell us what we see with our eyes."
There is little disagreement among the Democratic hopefuls who joined Castro on stage - Massachusetts Sen. Elizabeth Warren, Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, California Sen. Kamala Harris, former Vice President Joe Biden, South Bend, Indiana, Mayor Pete Buttigieg, Minnesota Sen. Amy Klobuchar, entrepreneur Andrew Yang, former Texas Rep. Beto O'Rourke and New Jersey Sen. Cory Booker - that climate change is a mounting catastrophe that Washington and the world need to take immediate action on. But candidates are trying to highlight their credentials as true champions on the issue, which polls show is among the highest priorities of likely Democratic primary and caucus voters.
The issue is particularly salient with young people - voters 18 to 23 are projected to make up one in 10 eligible voters in 2020. A Harvard University poll  in March found 74% of likely voters 18 to 29 disapprove of Trump's handling of climate issues, and 53% of likely voters agree  the government should do more to curb climate change even at the expense of economic growth.
Human-induced warming reached approximately 1 degree Celsius above pre-industrial levels, according to a 2017 United Nation's Intergovernmental Plan on Climate Change. Scientists project dire  consequences should the planet warm by 2 degrees Celsius above the pre-industrial levels.
"Heat waves would last around a third longer, rain storms would be about a third more intense, the increase in sea level would be approximately that much higher and the percentage of tropical coral reefs at risk of severe degradation would be roughly that much greater," according to NASA.
Castro on Wednesday said he would set a goal of pushing the country to end its reliance on carbon-fueled energy by 2045. He said his first act, should he be elected, would be to take executive action declaring to recommit to the Paris climate agreement, an international pact to reduce greenhouse gas emissions that Trump notified fellow signatories the U.S. would officially leave in November 2020.
Warren said she would spend $3 trillion on research and investment to cut carbon emissions. Her agenda includes making sure that new cars, buses and many trucks run on clean energy - instead of gasoline or diesel - by 2030 and that all the country's electricity comes from solar, wind and other renewable, carbon-free sources by 2035.
"We have a chance to turn this around in 2020, but we're running out of time," Warren said.
Sanders, who has unveiled a $16.3 trillion climate plan that he says would create 20 million jobs, end private utilities and ban hydraulic fracking, pushed back against the notion the nation can't afford his agenda.
"Maybe, just maybe, instead of spending a trillion and a half dollars every single year on weapons of destruction designed to kill each other, maybe we pool those resources and we work together against our common enemy, which is climate change," Sanders said.
Harris said she would move to ban hydraulic fracking and consider getting rid of the legislative filibuster in the Senate in order to pass the Green New Deal. The far-reaching  legislation,  derided by Trump as economic flimflam, aims to tackle climate change. By ending the filibuster, the legislation could be passed with a simple majority in the upper chamber instead of the 60-vote threshold currently needed.
She has also pitched a $10 trillion spending plan that sets out for the U.S. to reach the goal of 100% carbon-neutral electricity by 2030.
Harris said from Day 1 as president, if she's elected, she will make clear to the scientists in the U.S. government that her administration "will back you up" as it changes government approach to fighting rising global temperatures.
"Let's just be really clear: Donald Trump, he's got everyone excited by those crazy tweets," she said. "Meanwhile, with this hand he's quietly undoing regulations that were built over years, including incredible stuff the Obama administration did. Everybody is distracted by the crazy tweet. Meanwhile, he's completely deregulating industry."
Biden, the Democratic front-runner, has floated a more modest $1.7 trillion agenda for clean energy spending over 10 years and set the goal of eliminating the country's net carbon emissions by 2050. He pushed back on a question by CNN moderator Anderson Cooper about whether his plan is not aggressive enough - a notion that has been repeated by some environmental activists as well as rivals for the nomination.
"I think it is aggressive enough, and it's got good reviews from most of the environmental community," Biden said. "Science and technology are going to change, and as it charges, we learn more and can do more."
Buttigieg said that solving the climate crisis is perhaps the greatest challenge that humanity has faced since World War II. The mayor, who this week introduced a $1.5 trillion climate plan that he said would create 3 million clean energy and infrastructure jobs, went on to say failure to act was akin to sin, wondering out loud about what God thinks as the environment is destroyed.
"I also frankly think of it more selfishly when we talk about hitting this target of 2050 for decarbonizing our economy," said Buttigieg, the youngest of White House hopefuls at 37. "Lord willing, I plan to be here - I would be in my 60s by the time we know whether we have succeeded and can look back and be proud of what we did to getting on the right tack or realize we are the ones that blew it."
The climate forum didn't go unnoticed by Trump. He took to Twitter to blast Democrats' "destructive" proposals that he predicted would raise energy bills and prices at the pump.
"Don't the Democrats care about fighting American poverty?" Trump offered as a part of stream of tweets that served as a prebuttal.
On Wednesday, the administration also announced it was rolling back Energy Department requirements to make commonly used bulbs more efficient.
The new standards were included in energy legislation implemented under President George W. Bush and finalized under the Obama administration. The news standards, which would have gradually phased out incandescent and halogen bulbs, were set to go into effect in January 2020.
"I think he's just messing with CNN on that," longshot candidate  Yang joked.
Klobuchar noted at the town hall that the Ojibwe tribe has a saying to think about the impact their decisions will have on seven generations.
"We have a president that can't make a decision about seven minutes from now," Klobuchar said. 



Opposing view: Nuclear power is too costly and too risky



Nuclear power is not the solution to climate change.
Those who tuned into CNN's town hall on climate change may have been surprised to hear nuclear power come up repeatedly. Nuclear power is often proposed as a  solution because, unlike fossil fuels, it does not emit climate changing gases. But, unlike other zero emissions technologies such as solar and wind, nuclear poses enormous risks to the environment and communities, and it's too costly to boot.
Nuclear power raises all the dangers inherent in working with radioactive materials. Mining uranium produces tailings that create radon emissions and also pollutes soil and water with sulfuric acids and cyanic salts. Spent nuclear fuel can remain radioactive for thousands of years.
And there is always the risk of a catastrophic accident or terrorist attack that can release enormous amounts of radiation. Three Mile Island, Chernobyl and Fukushima all offer potent warnings of just how much can go wrong. There are already 448 operable nuclear power plants in the world, with  53 under construction. These plants pose significant risks, and adding more would be irresponsible.
Some people acknowledge the risks of nuclear but then argue that because  the impacts of climate change are so much greater, we need to adopt nuclear power despite the risks. But that argument overlooks the fact that we don't need nuclear to get to zero emissions energy. Studies, including a recent one from Energy Watch Group of Germany and LUT University in Finland, demonstrate that we can meet 100% of our energy needs with renewable energy.
These renewable technologies are already cost competitive with fossil fuels, unlike nuclear power, where plants  under construction regularly experience multiple delays and cost overruns, making them prohibitively expensive.
It's time we gave up on the delusion of nuclear power as a solution to climate change and scaled up the proven winners of solar and wind, along with  increased energy efficiency.
Todd Larsen is executive co-director of Green America. 



Wineries adapt to climate change; Vineyards and livelihoods around the world are at risk



ST. HELENA, Calif. - The estate house grounds at Spottswoode Winery look like a postcard from a 19th-century dream. A sprawling Victorian mansion commands a view of lush gardens, a shimmering swimming pool and 45 acres of grape-filled vines that soon will be harvested.
A very 21st-century menace casts a shadow over this sunny scene: climate change.
Soaring temperatures, irregular rain patterns and the ever-present threat of firescause winery owners here and around the world to adopt aggressive strategies to safeguard their livelihoods.  Tactics include experimenting with new varieties of grapes, finding new ways to use  water  and even seeking out land in areas that used to be too cold for vineyards.
"My parents started this winery, and I'm looking at passing it down," says Beth Novak Milliken, 58, CEO of Spottswoode Estate Vineyard and Winery, whose Cabernet Sauvignon can fetch $90 to $225 a bottle. "But to do that, I now have to plan ahead in a way I never thought I'd have to."
From 2012 to 2014, the winery in Napa County north of the San Francisco Bay Area experienced about six days over 98.6 degrees during each April-through-October growing season. That number rocketed to 17 days in 2015 and a record 21 in 2017 -  when temperatures hit a desert-like 118 degrees on a few occasions. The level of heat stresses the vines in unprecedented ways, sending temperatures inside the grapes soaring  upward of 150 degrees, risking the collapse of the delicate ripening and maturation process that is crucial to high-end winemaking.
"In 2017, we saw our vineyard go into stasis, a period where chemically nothing was happening, which was unheard of," says Aron Weinkauf, 43, Spottswoode's winemaker and vineyard manager. "This is not a crop you get a few shots at a year, like vegetables. It's just one chance each year to get it right. That translates to very expensive farming. So we have to do everything we can to ensure the longevity of this vineyard despite the huge pressure of climate change."
Measures include extensively shading the vineyards, developing cover crops that can help with either drought or flooding, and planting experimental rootstocks - the foundational root that lies below the ground - that may be better suited to higher temperatures.
"People around these parts are no longer talking about climate change as an 'if' or a 'when,'" Novak Milliken says. "It's here."
And it's global. Winemakers in both hemispheres are adapting to new climate norms.
New World is the future
In South Africa, a severe drought in May 2018 caused a 15% drop in the grape harvest, sending prices up and wineries scrambling to find new ways to leverage technology to manage irrigation, says Wanda Augustyn of VinPro, a trade association that represents South African wine producers.
In Spain, renowned winemakers Familia Torres have begun buying land high in the foothills of the Pyrenees mountains that border France, a zone whose consistently cool temperatures once made the area inhospitable to growing grapes but that climate change has made attractive.
In France, the hallowed home of the cultivated grape, the industry's strict governing body, the INAO, decreed last year that winemakers could  experiment with new grape varietals that could be used to balance out juice from harvests increasingly disrupted by hotter summers that lead to earlier cultivation and even increased alcohol levels.
Though winemaking's ancestral heart may be rooted in European soil, its future has always been in the New World, says Karl Storchmann, professor of economics at New York University and editor of the Journal of Wine Economics.
The USA is the world's largest retail wine market, valued at $70 billion in 2018, and the fourth-largest wine-producing nation behind Italy, Spain and France. Climate change  could reshape those numbers, Storchmann says.
"Fine-wine quality and prices are extraordinarily sensitive to fluctuations in the weather and the year in which the grapes were grown," Storchmann says. "Wine is an 'experience' good - that is, its quality cannot be ascertained before consumption."
Many winemakers look north. Storchmann says he sees vineyard land prices in southern France drop while prices in the north rise.
"The same can be seen in Canada and the United Kingdom," he says. "Northern regions are winning, while southern regions are losing, and vice versa in the Southern Hemisphere."
Christine Clair is winery director at Willamette Valley Vineyards in Turner, Oregon, south of Salem. Though the region is known for its cool climate, which is especially  hospitable to thin-skinned varietals such as pinot noir, Clair and her team have over the past few years looked  to plant at higher elevations - moving from below 500 feet to 500 to 800 feet - as the lower zones heat up.
The winery's vines have produced higher crop yields because of new periods of unusual heat. "The accounting team really likes it," Clair says. "We can farm more fruit."
But she's aware that if warming trends continue, "our winery will have to look for cooler spots to maintain the stylistic goals we have for our product."
Her team remains vigilant of wildfires, which have been stoked across the West because of higher temperatures and greater aridity. Fires damaged some California wineries in recent years, and the smoke, if dense and persistent enough, can permeate the berry and alter its flavor.
"There's no question there's more for us to think about these days," Clair says.
In search of cooler zones
Ultimately, consumers might need to train their palates to appreciate new wine varietals.
"People can't expect to buy the same product year in and year out and not expect change," says Gregory Jones, a wine industry authority and director of the Evenstad Center for Wine Education at Linfield College in McMinnville, Oregon. "As climate change evolves, consumers need to embrace the newness of what might come."
Jones notes that of the 5,000 known grape varietals, only about 20 are produced worldwide, leaving thousands of others to experiment with.
"I'm optimistic because there's a lot of adaptive capability in this industry," says Jones, who addressed a gathering of wine experts in Sweden, where cooler-climate wine production was explored. "But I am pessimistic because at some point, the climate will be too warm for certain things, wine or otherwise. So being proactive is a big piece of this."
Ria D'Aversa, director of ranch operations at McEvoy Ranch, says climate change is "keeping us all on our toes."
McEvoy, which produces wine and olive oil, is  in the Petaluma Gap, an area north of Napa and Sonoma counties in California's wine country and much closer to the cooling breezes and frequent fog generated off the Pacific Ocean.
For years, McEvoy has produced pinot noir that benefited from those temperature-reducing winds, but lately, "it's been getting extremely hot, which means we have to think, what should be the next step?" D'Aversa says.
That could mean experimenting with new varietals that can cope with temperature swings, or buying land higher up in the gap to hedge against temperature spikes. "We just have to deal with the ups and downs more," D'Aversa says. "With Mother Nature, you don't have control."
S. Kaan Kurtural is a viticulture expert at the University of California-Davis, a center for wine science. He says the way the climate has affected the industry over the past few years has "shocked me. It's not going to be business as usual."
He's conducting an experiment with Napa's Beckstoffer Vineyards that involves planting 3,600 Cabernet plants made up of 100 different rootstock and clone combinations. The idea is for Kurtural  to spend the next eight years making wine from this plot to see whether some of the experimental crop proves more heat- or drought-resistant.
"Anyone who farms anything has known that the climate has been shifting for a while, but now there's an economic necessity to take action," Kurtural says. "We're looking to the future."
At Larkmead Vineyards in Napa Valley, winemaker Dan Petroski has no interest in waiting to see what the future holds. "It's all happening quicker than we thought, and I have a fiduciary responsibility to the owners of this winery to see where this business is going," he says.
Given that Larkmead is known for Cabernet wines that can sell for more than $350 a bottle, he is eager to see what grapes can be developed that could be used to blend with Cabernet to cut any heat-induced acidity while maintaining the label's signature flavor.
To that end, he's getting ready to plant an experimental 3-acre parcel with more heat-resistant varietals at a cost of $75,000. It's a gamble, but one he says he has to take.
One family's dream at risk
About 6 miles south of Larkmead Vineyards, Spottswoode winemaker Aron Weinkauf walks through the rows of deep purple Cabernet grapes that are responsible for the winery's burnished reputation. It's 100 degrees in the shade.
Weinkauf points out how the winery hopes to hedge against the effects of warming temperature. He motions to the long mesh canopies that line the rows of grapes, designed to cut back on the intensity of the sun rays and  help the grapes ripen more slowly.
Next, he runs his hand across the grass at the base of the dry, thick vines, the so-called cover crop that helps the soil retain moisture or, in the case of heavy rains, can be cut back to allow better evaporation.
High-tech gauges  dot the vineyards, all related to detecting the percentage of moisture in the air  to more efficiently conserve the water that drips on each vine stalk through small emitters.
Lastly, he points out small, recent plantings that could represent the future of Spottswoode, new grape varietals that will be given a chance to react to temperature swings and spikes.
"With what we've been seeing, we simply have to have more tools in our toolbox," Weinkauf says. "We have one crop. The stakes are high." 



Amazon commits to 100% renewable energy; Company to buy 100,000 electric vans, Bezos says



WASHINGTON - Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos said Thursday that the company has committed to meet the terms of the Paris climate agreement 10 years ahead of schedule, including by purchasing 100,000 electric vans and moving to 100% renewable energy.
Amazon has been facing pressure from its employees and activists to reduce its emissions in an effort to combat climate change.
A day before a global climate strike is expected to call attention to the world's environmental plight, Bezos said the company would use its considerable leverage to slash carbon emissions.
Bezos told reporters that Amazon would "implement de-carbonization strategies in line with the Paris agreement," alter its "actual business activities to eliminate carbon" and acquire "credible" carbon offsets based on "nature-based solutions."
Former United Nations climate chief Christiana Figueres, who appeared alongside Bezos in an endorsement of the company's plan, said Amazon would also pressure its business partners to meet the goals.
"We want to use our scale and our scope to lead the way," Bezos said. "We have to do it."
Amazon gets about 40% of its energy from renewable sources with 15 utility-scale solar and wind farms. That will move to 80% by 2024 and 100% by 2030, Bezos said.
The company will also purchase 100,000 electric delivery vans from Michigan-based start-up Rivian, he said. Currently, all of the company's vans burn fossil fuels. Amazon has invested $400 million in Rivian, which also has backing from Ford.
Bezos said he remains optimistic that the world can successfully confront climate change despite dire scientific projections of sea-level rise, environmental catastrophes, health epidemics and extreme weather.
"You can invent your way out of any box - and that's what we humans need to do right now," he said. "I believe we're going to do it. I'm sure we're going to do it."
Asked how Amazon's move to one-day or same-day delivery affects the environment, he defended the company's business model, saying that short delivery times require local warehouses and often can't be done by carbon-heavy planes.
"It actually turns out that as you increase the speed of delivery, you have less carbon," he said. "That is counterintuitive."
Thousands of Amazon's own workers have signed onto a group called Amazon Employees for Climate Justice, which organized a campaign to urge the company's shareholders to adopt a resolution forcing the company to take action.
The measure won the support of two independent shareholder advisory services but was rejected by investors in May. Rebecca Sheppard, a senior product manager at Amazon who is active in Amazon Employees for Climate Justice, told USA TODAY recently that "Amazon's paying attention" - based on the company's recent actions, including an announcement involving plans to cut emissions from 50% of its packages.
"Being an employee is actually a great gift to change the industry for which you work," Sheppard said at the time. "If you want to invoke change, the best way to do so is to go into the industry where you want to see the change and fight for it." Sheppard added: "It seems increasingly that being on the right side of the climate crisis is not a fringe issue. It's becoming more and more what shareholders and investors expect." 



Skipping class today? Students will rally for climate change



SAN FRANCISCO - Tens of thousands of high school students in cities nationwide plan to skip classes Friday to attend Global Climate Strike marches calling for immediate action to end climate change. They will be part of a global joint protest aimed directly at the adults who they say are ignoring the destruction of the planet.
"We have to treat climate change as what it is - an emergency," said Audrey Maurine Xin Lin, an 18-year-old who's been one of the coordinators of the Boston school strike and march.
The events come out of a groundswell of worry on the part of young people about the future of the planet. Students in more than 800 locations around the United States plan to go on strike from school for the day to attend protests.
"It's going to be a really, really powerful day, the launch of a new era of climate movement. This is just the beginning for us," said Katie Eder, 19, who is the executive director of the Future Coalition, a youth-led nonprofit helping the groups coordinate.
The protests are timed to begin a week of activism at the United Nations, including a Youth Climate Summit on Saturday and a U.N. Climate Action Summit on Monday. A second strike is planned for Friday, Sept. 27.
Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg, 16, put a face on the global movement beginning in August 2018 when she began skipping school on Fridays to stand outside the Swedish parliament holding a sign protesting inaction on climate change. She came to New York on a solar-powered sailboat to attend the strike in New York City and then the summit.
The movement is not led by her, but a broad group of young people who say they are frightened for their futures and angry that adults have done so little. Unlike the Vietnam War protests, which were mostly college students, the organizers of these events are mostly high school and even some middle school students.
"I want to emphasize that our entire organizing team is under 20. Young people and students have really been leading this," Lin said. She and four other teens were on a press call Wednesday describing the work they're doing and why it's important.
The young people said they want politicians to act as if the world's on fire and begin curbing carbon emissions and taking the fight against global warming seriously.
"We won't have the chance to make the changes we need to if we don't have the courage to fight," said Dulce Belen Ceballos Arias, 18, from Redwood City, California. She is helping plan the San Francisco march.
"I want to have children of my own and I want them to have a life better than me and I don't want that chance to be taken away from them," she said.
Young people aren't the only ones getting involved. Multiple companies, mostly on the smaller side, are shutting down for the day so employees can attend local marches. They include Ben & Jerry's, Patagonia, Burton and SodaStream.
But while the students say they're happy to have adults march and get involved, for them this is personal.
"It's our future that's at stake," said Gabriella Marchesani, 17, a Miami Strike youth leader.
While some school districts are giving students who attend the marches an excused absence, others aren't. In Florida, Miami-Dade County Public Schools is not, a district spokeswoman said.
Marchesani sees that as misguided in a city that is expected to be hit hard by rising sea levels in the coming years and where "our houses might be underwater soon." 



Nuclear power gets 2nd look amid closure of Three Mile Island



MIDDLETOWN, Pa. - Even 40 years later, John Garver vividly remembers the metallic taste of the nation's worst commercial nuclear disaster.
An acrid odor permeated Harrisburg as he walked out of a restaurant in Pennsylvania's capital city the morning of March 28, 1979.
"We had this smell in the air, wondering what it was," recalled Garver, 80, now a retired salesman. "Well it didn't take us long to find out ... that the accident started."
Some 14 miles away, the "accident" was unfolding in Unit 2 at the Three Mile Island Nuclear Power Plant, triggering panic, confusion and, within days, an evacuation order.
The partial meltdown sparked national protests, prompted increased safety standards for the nuclear power industry, and largely stymied the industry's momentum for decades until recent alarm over climate change has made some begin to embrace expanding carbon-free nuclear power.
Friday, the remaining reactor (Unit 1) generated its last kilowatt of energy and closed, a victim not of the anti-nuclear movement but rather of simple economics. Even though the plant is licensed to operate until 2034, Exelon Generation  ceased operations after the state of Pennsylvania refused to throw the company a financial lifeline that would have kept it open.
The plant's four cooling towers will remain part of the landscape for now, concrete tombstones that seem out of place in the bucolic Susquehanna Valley of central Pennsylvania.
While it may not produce power, Three Mile Island (TMI) will continue to generate memories, said local historian Erik Fasick.
"It shouldn't be forgotten," he said, the towers looming over his shoulder as he stood outside the plant's grounds along Route 441. "It's the most important event that's occurred in this area since the Battle of Gettysburg in 1863."
Nuclear energy comeback
The closure of Three Mile Island comes as nuclear power is getting a second look thanks to the devastating impact of climate change.
Nuclear is the largest single supplier of carbon-free energy in the nation, providing about 20% of U.S. energy. With  environmentalists and Democratic lawmakers calling for ambitious deadlines to wean the country off fossil fuels that emit greenhouse gases, advocates say nuclear power is emerging as a necessary ingredient of any response plan.
Some Democratic presidential candidates have touted the benefits of "next-generation" nuclear power - or at least said it's worthy of consideration - as they push for alternatives to coal, oil and gas.
"Right now, nuclear is more than 50% of our non-carbon causing energy," Sen. Cory Booker, D-N.J., told a CNN town hall on climate change this month. "So people who think we can get there without nuclear being part of the blend just aren't looking at the facts."
But economic factors, mainly from the production of cheap natural gas and increasingly affordable renewable sources, are slowly driving nuclear power out of business.
TMI's shuttering means there will be 97 commercial reactors at 59 plants scattered across 30 states.
Six reactors at five plants have been mothballed since 2013, and several others are slated to close in the next few years if they do not receive new financial support, according to a 2018 report from the Union of Concerned Scientists.
A number of plants that were already in the pipeline prior to TMI's accident received licenses to operate after 1979. But plans for 39 others were canceled in the wake of the catastrophe, according to Nuclear Regulatory Commission documents, though factors such as high interest rates also contributed to the slowdown in new plants.
"Public confidence in nuclear energy, particularly in (the) USA, declined sharply following the Three Mile Island accident," according to the World Nuclear Association, a pro-industry group. "It was a major cause of the decline in nuclear construction through the 1980s and 1990s."
Eric Epstein, a Harrisburg resident who chairs the Three Mile Island Alert organization that has long called for the shutdown of the facility, agreed that the accident set the industry back decades.
"If there is a good thing that happened because of TMI, it's that it has ignited a fierce debate on the viability of nuclear power being safe, reliable, economical," he said.
The accident
Construction of the plant began in 1968 with the first reactor going online six years later. Unit 2 came online in December 1978. Both were operated at the time by Metropolitan Edison. (Exelon, the current owner, didn't take over TMI until 2000).
At around 4 a.m. Wednesday March 28, 1979, a mechanical or electrical failure prevented two pumps from sending water to steam generators, which cool the nuclear reactor with circulating water. A chain of events, punctuated by a stuck valve at the top of the pressurizer that was not detected, led confused operators to take steps that exposed the core leading to a partial meltdown.
A chemical reaction formed a bubble of hydrogen gas inside the reactor. Operators reduce the bubble's size through periodic venting to the atmosphere through April 1. The plant entered a "cold shutdown" April 27.
Over the next several days, there were conflicting messages about the severity of the crisis and how much radiation had been released.
Geiger counters to detect and measure ionizing radiation became commonplace. Children and pregnant women were encouraged to evacuate the area, first within a 5-mile radius of TMI, then within 20 miles. An estimated 140,000 residents left as well, hoping to outrun the radiation threat.
Fueling those fears was the release 12 days earlier of "The China Syndrome," a Hollywood thriller starring Jane Fonda about an accident at a nuclear power plant that was similar to the scenario that unfolded at Three Mile Island, named because it sits three miles downriver from the center of Middletown.
In the movie, Fonda plays a TV reporter who is told that an explosion at the fictional plant in Southern California "could render an area the size of the state of Pennsylvania permanently uninhabitable."
"I knew that line was coming. ... Everybody knew it was coming," recalled Fasick, who as a 7-year-old accompanied his parents to watch the movie at a local theater a week after the accident. "When it was said, there was still that audible gasp. You could hear it."
Unit 2, a structure built to withstand an airplane crash, never reopened thanks to the malfunction of a tiny valve. Unit 1 returned to service in October 1985 under new management following the U.S. Supreme Court's decision not to block the restarting.
The accident forced drastic changes in nuclear power plant operations and safety measures. More stringent training procedures were adopted. Plants were upgraded to be more secure. Communication protocols between plant operators and area governments improved. More comprehensive warning and preparation regimens were adopted. Evacuation plans grew more sophisticated. There has been no major problem at a U.S. nuclear plant since Three Mile Island.
The challenge of nuclear waste
Three Mile Island is closing but it will be decades before it's dismantled.
The first step to decommissioning the site involves transferring fuel to dry cask storage, made of stainless steel and concrete, for secure containment. That should happen around 2022, according to Exelon.
The disassembling of the plant's largest components, such as the cooling towers, is not expected to happen until 2074. Four years after that, all radioactive material will be safely stored or removed from station.
Epstein calls the on-site storage of waste "a toxic problem without a forwarding address." It's an issue bedeviling the nuclear power industry.
Spent nuclear fuel is now being stored in pools or in concrete and dry casks at every operating reactor site around the country, as well as the sites of permanently shut down reactors, according to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. All those sites have, and will continue to have, adequate storage for their spent fuel, a spokesman said.
In 1987, Congress selected Nevada's Yucca Mountain, a remote section of the Mojave Desert that sits about 90 miles northwest of Las Vegas, to become the nation's permanent repository for nuclear waste generated by utility power plants and the military.
The Energy Department began pursuing a license for the facility in 2008. But the Obama administration abandoned the project three years later amid intense opposition from residents and political leaders in Nevada, including Harry Reid, who at the time was the Senate's top Democrat.
With Reid gone, Congress keeps trying to revive the Yucca proposal.
The House last year voted overwhelmingly to direct the Department of Energy to resume the licensing process for a nuclear waste facility at Yucca, but the plan has stalled.
People were fearful of residents
John Ziats was 26 when the accident happened.  The 66-year-old retiree remembers the same metallic taste Garver experienced and thought he was coming down with an illness until he learned of the partial meltdown.
At the urging of his cousins in Connecticut, he evacuated to New England.
When Ziats arrived in Connecticut and went to a drug store, he realized how much the accident had jarred the nation.
"People didn't even want to be around us. (They) would step back because they were just fearful that we had some sort of contamination or something. So you kind of lived with that for a while," Ziats recalled.
He returned home a few days later when it looked safe. But his angst persisted and he attended an anti-nuclear protest near Harrisburg that featured Fonda.
But over time, Ziats' attitude changed.
He began to see carbon-free nuclear energy as an answer to the fossil fuels that contribute to global warming. He saw how TMI has played an important - and accident-free - role in his community over the past 40 years. And, following the discovery of a malignant tumor behind his left eye a few years ago, he saw how radiation treatments saved his life.
"How can you really be against the nuclear industry when they've done so many positive things for people," he said.
Garver, on the other hand, said he's relieved to see the plant close.
"You don't have to worry about it anymore. You don't have to worry about sirens going off. You don't have to worry about anything," he said.
Garver said he never thought about leaving the area when the accident happened or when the remaining reactor started up again in 1985.
"This is my home," he said. "This is where I was born and this is where I'm going to die."
Then he added with a laugh: "Hopefully not from nuclear power. And I think I'm going to make it now." 



Avett Brothers getting political on 'Closer'; Gun culture, climate change in band's sights



The Avett Brothers say they'll never make a quote-unquote "sociopolitical record."
But if they did, it probably would sound something like the North Carolina folk rock band's 10th album, "Closer Than Together," (out now), a call for unity  from the group founded in 2000 by Scott and Seth Avett.
"The reality is, all our records have had political and social issues in them, because we're people and we aren't blind or ignorant to what's going on," says singer/banjo player Scott Avett, 43. "But some of the songs (on this album) are a little more literal," including "Bang Bang," a searing critique of American gun culture, and "New Woman's World," a pointed satire of greed, climate change and toxic masculinity.
With the band touring the USA through next summer, Scott chats with USA TODAY about new Avett music, the 2020 election and how he talks to his kids about guns.
Question: Was there ever any fear of alienating your core fan base by getting "too political"?
Scott Avett: No, I think true fans of an artist know they're not going to love everything someone does. If they did, it's kind of like a (married couple) that never argued - that's not real. That's not even love. Love and unity have disagreement, but disagreement doesn't have to mean division, and that's reflective of the message and title of the whole record. To disagree and find diversity within unity is the glory of America. So the issue we have in our culture right now with gun violence is a real thing.
Q: There are so many different facets of the gun debate. Why did you want to tackle gun violence on "Bang Bang"?
A: I own several guns and I grew up around very responsible gun owners, so I saw a relationship with people and guns that was very different than the kind you see in many movies. The song is commenting on how ludicrous some of the examples of guns on screen are, like, "You get shot three times while running through a mall, killing enemies or zombies or whatever." You watch and you go, "What is this doing?" I don't know, but I can say that I don't want to watch it. Even though (the violence) in many cases is relevant, now it's part of many true stories (we see in the news), and I don't know that it helps in the state we're in as a culture and a country.
Q: On-screen violence has been a hot topic these past few weeks with "Joker," which has raised concerns of potential copycat attacks. Have you paid attention to the controversy?
A: I have not. I don't think (gun violence in entertainment) is the sole problem, but if my kid is confused about (why people use) guns and then he or she is seeing that, how do they respond to it? ...  If they're grown and they are a gun owner who's responsible - of which there are many - I don't think it's going to affect them in a bad way. I think they know, "Look, this is just entertainment." But that stuff worries me as a parent. You really wonder, "How do I guide them in a way they can respect this and not get confused by all the noise?"
Q: As a parent, how have you talked to your kids about mass shootings and guns?
A: They have had shooting drills. My kids are 4, 8 and 10, so the youngest doesn't really get it. But I approach it like my father did with me: Guns are tools, not toys. Even if you had a toy gun, you could never aim it at another human ever - that was like a huge offense in our family. ... So for me and my kids, because we live in a rural area, it's important for them to know that (a gun) is really loud, it's really serious, you don't mess with it, and that if you own one, it's very important that you put it away and never keep it loaded.
Q: The album wrestles with troubles in America but is ultimately hopeful for the future of our country. How are you feeling about the 2020 election? Are there any candidates you find promising?
A: I've never thrown my weight behind any of that stuff. I've only voted for president three times in my life - my first time was when Barack Obama was elected. I guess Trump is the only guy on the Republican side (this election cycle), but some of the things (Democrat) Andrew Yang has said have been really cool. I'm independent, and I've never claimed an absolute on either side, because I don't (vote based) on one issue. Unfortunately, the most reasonable people never get elected. (Laughs.) 



'Bird emergency': Two-thirds at risk; Climate change threatens almost 400 species in US



Two-thirds of America's birds will be threatened with extinction if global warming tops 5.4 degrees Fahrenheit by 2100, according to a report released Thursday by the National Audubon Society.
"A lot of people paid attention to last month's report that North America has lost nearly a third of its birds," said David Yarnold, CEO and president of Audubon. "This new data pivots forward and imagines an even more frightening future. It's a bird emergency."
Three hundred eighty-nine out of 604 species are at risk of extinction from climate change, the report said. A few of the imperiled species include state birds such as Minnesota's common loon, New Jersey's goldfinch and California's quail.
To prepare the report - "Survival by Degrees: Bird Species on the Brink" - Audubon scientists studied 604 North American bird species using 140 million bird records, including observational data from bird lovers and field biologists across the U.S., Canada and Mexico.
In addition to warming temperatures, the scientists also looked at climate-related effects  on birds across the lower 48 states, including sea-level rise, water level changes in the Great Lakes, urbanization, cropland expansion, droughts, extreme spring heat, fire weather and heavy rain.
"Birds are important indicator species because if an ecosystem is broken for birds, it is or soon will be for people, too," said Brooke Bateman, Audubon's senior climate scientist.
The report offered some hope, noting that if the greenhouse gas emissions that bring about climate change are reduced, then the odds of survival for many bird species can be lifted.
David O'Neill, Audubon's chief conservation officer, called the findings  "the fifth alarm in a five-alarm fire." 



Expert: Global warming hitting Taku Glacier



One of the world's thickest mountain glaciers is finally succumbing to global warming, a new analysis reports.
The Taku Glacier north of Juneau, Alaska, has started to retreat as temperatures rise, said Mauri Pelto, a glaciologist at Nichols College in Massachusetts.
Up until now, of the 250 glaciers he has studied, all had retreated except one: Taku Glacier. But an analysis shows Taku has lost mass and joined the rest of the retreating glaciers.
"This is a big deal for me because I had this one glacier I could hold on to," Pelto told NASA's Earth Observatory. "But not anymore. This makes the score climate change: 250, and alpine glaciers: 0."
New photos released by NASA this week show that the melting of Taku has at last become visible.
Taken in August 2014 and August 2019, the photos show the icy platforms where the glacier meets a river retreating for the first time since scientists began studying Taku in 1946, LiveScience said.
Taku is one of the thickest known alpine glaciers in the world, measuring 4,860 feet from surface to bed.
A study about the glacier's retreat was published last month in the journal Remote Sensing.
Overall,  global warming continues to melt away our planet's glaciers,  which lose up to 390 billion tons of ice and snow every year, a study published earlier this year suggests.
The largest losses were glaciers in Alaska, followed by the melting ice fields in southern South America and glaciers in the Arctic.
At 1,500 square miles, the Juneau ice field is one-third larger than the state of Rhode Island, stretching from the Pacific Ocean into Canada, according to the Anchorage Daily News. It has dozens of named glaciers - including Taku - and many more smaller, unnamed glaciers.
A scientific paper in 2016 reported that the ice field is expected to lose more than half its ice by the end of the century and to disappear before 2200, the Daily News said. 



Cities banning natural gas in new homes to save the planet



SAN FRANCISCO - Fix global warming or cook dinner on a gas stove?
That's the choice for people in 13 cities and one county in California that have enacted new zoning codes encouraging or requiring all-electric new construction.
The codes, most of them passed since June, are meant to keep builders from running natural gas lines to new homes and apartments, with an eye toward creating fewer legacy gas hookups as the nation shifts to carbon-neutral energy sources.
For proponents, it's a change that must be made to fight climate change. For natural gas companies, it's a threat to their existence. And for some cooks who love to prepare food with flame, it's an unthinkable loss.
Natural gas is a fossil fuel, mostly methane, and produces 33% of U.S. carbon dioxide emissions from electricity generation, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration. Carbon dioxide is the primary greenhouse gas causing climate change.
"There's no pathway to stabilizing the climate without phasing gas out of our homes and buildings. This is a must-do for the climate and a livable planet," said Rachel Golden of the Sierra Club's building electrification campaign.
These new building codes come as local governments work to speed the transition from natural gas and other fossil fuels and toward the use of electricity from renewables, said Robert Jackson, a professor of energy and the environment at Stanford University in Palo Alto, California.
"Every house, every high-rise that's built with gas, may be in place for decades. We're establishing infrastructure that may be in place for 50 years," he said.
These "reach" or "stretch" building codes, as they are known, have so far all been passed in California. The first was in Berkeley in July, then more in Northern California and recently Santa Monica in Southern California. Other cities in Massachusetts, Oregon and Washington state are contemplating them, according to the Sierra Club.
Some of the cities ban natural gas hookups to new construction. Others offer builders incentives if they go all-electric, much the same as they might get to take up more space on a lot if a house is extra energy-efficient.
In April, Sunnyvale, a town in Silicon Valley, changed its building code to offer a density bonus to all-electric developments.
The building codes apply only to new construction beginning in 2020, so they aren't an issue for anyone in an already-built home.
Probably the biggest stumbling block for most pondering an all-electric home is the prospect of not having a gas stove.
"It's the only thing that people ever ask about," said Bruce Nilles, who directs the building electrification program of the Rocky Mountain Institute, a Colorado-based think tank that focuses on energy and resource efficiency.
Roughly 35% of U.S. households have a gas stove, while 55%have electric, according to a 2017 kitchen audit by the NPD Group, a global information company based in Port Washington, New York.
For at least a quarter of Americans, it doesn't matter either way. They already live in houses that are all-electric, and their numbers are rising, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration. That's especially true in the Southeast, where close to 45% of homes are all-electric.
The natural gas industry rejects the notion that it should not be part of the nation's energy future.
"The idea that denying access to natural gas in new homes is necessary to meet emissions reduction goals is false. In fact, denying access to natural gas could make meeting emissions goals harder and more expensive," said American Gas Association President and CEO Karen Harbert.
The selling point for getting away from natural gas may come from a type of electric range that, according to chefs, is just as good if not better than gas. As fundamentally attached as people might be to cooking with fire, induction stoves are making headway.
Long popular in Europe and increasingly trendy in the United States, induction cooktops are different from the kind of traditional electric range where coils become red-hot. Induction ranges use electromagnetic energy to directly heat pots and pans.
The downsides are that induction cooktops are more expensive than traditional electric stoves, generally a third to half more. They also work only with pans with steel or iron bottoms.
Professional chefs say modern induction ranges are comparable to gas. The Culinary Institute of America in Hyde Park, New York, America's preeminent cooking school, trains its chefs on both induction and gas stoves because they will encounter both types and must know how to use them.
"Some of the finest restaurants in Europe are often out in mountainous areas or places where there isn't gas. They cook on induction and that works just fine," said Mark Erickson, a certified master chef at the institute. 



Study: Climate change is hurting health of children



Climate change is already damaging children's health worldwide and could shape the well-being of an entire generation - unless the world meets the Paris Agreement targets to limit warming to well below 3.6 degrees F, according to a new report published Wednesday by the British health journal The Lancet.
According to the report, if the world continues its  path - with high carbon dioxide emissions and climate change continuing at the current rate - a child born today will face a world on average over 7 degrees F warmer by their 71st birthday, threatening their health at every stage of their lives.
"Children are particularly vulnerable to the health risks of a changing climate. Their bodies and immune systems are still developing, leaving them more susceptible to disease and environmental pollutants," said Dr. Nick Watts, a report co-author and executive director of the Lancet Countdown.
"The damage done in early childhood is persistent and pervasive, with health consequences lasting for a lifetime," Watts said. "Without immediate action from all countries to cut greenhouse gas emissions, gains in well-being and life expectancy will be compromised, and climate change will come to define the health of an entire generation."
The report, titled The Lancet Countdown on Health and Climate Change, is a collaboration among 120 climate and health experts from 35 institutions around the globe.
The report stated that as temperatures rise, harvests will shrink - threatening food security and driving up food prices. Infants and small children are among the worst affected by malnutrition and related health problems such as stunted growth, weak immune systems and long-term developmental issues. 



Study: Feds not doing enough to protect endangered species



Nearly every animal on the endangered species list is threatened by human-caused climate change, yet federal agencies aren't doing enough to protect those species from the threats, a new study finds.
Researchers examined the 459 U.S. endangered animal species to gauge their sensitivity to climate change along with their ability to survive, based on federal plans designed to protect them.
The study found that 99.8% of the species possess a trait that could make it challenging for them to adapt to global warming.
"Our study demonstrates that while climate change is a pressing threat to imperiled species, agencies that manage federally protected species have not given enough attention to this threat," said study lead author Aimee Delach, a senior policy analyst at the Defenders of Wildlife.
The study was published Monday in the peer-reviewed British journal Nature Climate Change.
Amphibians, mollusks and arthropods - including the Sonoran tiger salamander, white wartyback pearly mussel and Florida leafwing butterfly - were sensitive to the greatest number of factors related to climate change. Mammals such as the North Atlantic right whale and Florida panther were found to be sensitive to the fewest number of factors, the study found.
Climate change can lead to problems with water quality, shifting seasons and harmful invasive species that move in as temperatures climb, the Guardian said.
However, the study found that federal agencies consider only 64% of endangered species to be threatened by climate change and have implemented protection plans for just 18% of listed species.
"Even worse, we found the agencies are moving in the wrong direction, with actions in recovery documents addressing climate change threats declining since 2014," Delach said.
"The current administration produced only one species' document in 2017-18 that included management actions to address climate impacts."
A spokesman for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, which oversees the endangered species list, told the Guardian that while a species may be sensitive to changes in the climate, this sensitivity may not be so severe as to warrant being put on the list. 



Carbon dioxide hits another record high; WMO official: 'There is no signs of a slowdown'



Carbon dioxide - the greenhouse gas most responsible for global warming - reached an all-time high in Earth's atmosphere in 2018, the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) announced Monday.
"There is no sign of a slowdown, let alone a decline, in greenhouse gas concentration in the atmosphere despite all the commitments under the Paris Agreement on Climate Change," WMO Secretary-General Petteri Taalas said in a statement.
Globally averaged concentrations of carbon dioxide reached 407.8 parts per million in 2018, up from 405.5 parts per million in 2017, the WMO said.
The burning of fossil fuels such as coal, oil and gas releases greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane into Earth's atmosphere and oceans. The extra greenhouse gases have caused the planet's temperatures to rise to levels that cannot be explained by natural factors, scientists report.
In the past 20 years, the world's temperature has risen about two-thirds of a degree Fahrenheit, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said.
In a statement, the WMO said this continuing long-term trend of rising carbon dioxide means that future generations will be confronted with increasingly severe impacts of climate change, including rising temperatures, more extreme weather, water stress, sea level rise and disruption to marine and land ecosystems.
"It is worth recalling that the last time the Earth experienced a comparable concentration of carbon dioxide was 3-5 million years ago," Taalas said.
Back then, he said the Earth's temperature was as much as 5 degrees warmer and sea levels were as much as 65 feet higher than they are now.
Carbon dioxide remains in the atmosphere for centuries and in the oceans for even longer.
Carbon dioxide wasn't the only greenhouse gas to surge in 2018: Concentrations of methane and nitrous oxide also surged by higher amounts than they had during the past decade, the WMO said. 



USA TODAY reaches into depths of the divide to offer answers



America is divided. And Americans are placing blame:
ABOUT
THIS SERIES
Each month we'll tackle a different topic.
This month: political divisiveness Next month: climate change
On national politicians, who promote destructive public debate for personal gain.
On social media, which has more to gain than lose from divisiveness.
And, yes, on news media. "Now it depends on what channel and what station you watch," Lynn Andino from New Rochelle, N.Y., told our research partners. "Wasn't the media supposed to be neutral, to report on facts?"
But here's the hopeful part: Americans don't want it to be this way and have ideas on how to fix it, according to a new Public Agenda/USA TODAY/Ipsos poll measuring the depth of our divide.
This survey launches our ambitious Hidden Common Ground project, monthly research and analysis that surfaces areas of agreement and provides tools to help us have more constructive conversations. Each month, USA TODAY will go deep into thorny topics and offer solutions from thought leaders.
You've told us you want to speak up but are afraid of being criticized.
You want to better understand the views of the opposing political party but don't have a good way to do so.
And, personally, you want relief - the rancor is making too many of you anxious, sad and depressed.
Consider this part blueprint, part balm.
We're not advocating for watering down ideas. We are suggesting  that we better understand how others think  and learn how to have productive debate. You've told us: Our divisiveness is killing our ability to address our problems. In a democracy, change must be grounded in public support.
Our partners at the nonpartisan Public Agenda research and engagement organization have been studying public opinion for more than 40 years. President Will Friedman says he just didn't buy the narrative of a hopelessly divided America. "All that seemed overstated to us to the point of being self-fulfilling and self-destructive," he says.
Friedman approached USA TODAY with a proposal: What if we joined forces to show the true America? To provide tools to help us talk. To reach the "exhausted middle of the electorate."
It was a perfect fit for USA TODAY, long known for being the home of direct facts and multiple viewpoints. Whenever you see a grid of media on a political spectrum, researchers place USA TODAY squarely in the middle. The project reflects founder Al Neuharth's 1982 mission statement about USA TODAY serving as "a forum for better understanding and unity to help make the USA truly one nation."
Mizell Stewart III, our senior director of news partnerships, worked with Public Agenda and market research firm Ipsos on the topics we'll tackle. "People do want to find common ground." he says. "They don't always know how."
Here's how:
Each month, we'll explore your opinions on  issues like health care, immigration and economic opportunity. In addition to the analysis in USA TODAY, you can find full reports at publicagenda.org.
We'll bring you stories of progress. "When you get outside the Beltway, you find a lot of people working together, trying to solve problems," Friedman says. "They aren't paying as much attention to the partisan affiliations."
We'll create a space for constructive discussion. Join us at talk.usatoday.com, where you can join moderated conversations on each month's topics.
We'll partner with the National Issues Forums on online and in-person gatherings that help you learn how to tease out answers to complicated problems. "People need to understand about the tradeoffs," Friedman says. "What direction do we want to go, what is hard about it, what is going to have to change to get there? That is what makes it real."
Ninety-two percent of Americans say it's important to reduce divisiveness in our country, and this is equally true among Republicans, Democrats and independents. Sixty-five percent say it's very important.
We're proud to do our part.
"Working with you all, we hope to create a model that we and others can learn from," Friedman says, "a news media partnership that contributes in a creative way."
Each week in The Backstory, editor-in-chief Nicole Carroll shares stories behind the news of the week. To get The Backstory newsletter each week, sign up at newsletters.usatoday.com. 



Birds are shrinking; Scientists believe climate change may be to blame



Scientists believe that birds in North America are getting smaller because of rising temperatures associated with climate change.
A study published Wednesday in the peer-reviewed Ecology Letters found not only that birds' bodies are shrinking, but also that their legs are getting shorter and wings are getting longer.
David Willard, study co-author and collections manager emeritus at the Field Museum in Chicago, measured 70,716 North American migratory birds of 52 different species from 1978 to 2016.
For nearly 40 years, scientists and researchers woke up at about 3:30 a.m. to collect and measure birds that crashed into the museum's windows during the spring or fall migration period for Willard, according to the Field Museum.
"It started as a very casual study - someone mentioned that birds sometimes run into McCormick Place, and I was curious, so I went for a walk around the building one morning," Willard said in the museum's press release. "I found a couple dead birds and I brought them back to the museum."
Willard discovered that over time the birds' mass decreased by about 2.6% and leg length decreased by about 2.4%. He also found that their wing length increased by about 1.3%.
Scientists also measured temperature, precipitation, vegetation and other environmental factors. They found that warmer temperatures were associated with a smaller body size.
Co-author Benjamin Winger, who also studies the evolution and ecology of birds at  University of Michigan, told The Washington Post that warmer temperatures have had an "almost universal effect" of shrinking other animals.
According to the Field Museum, smaller bodies hold onto less heat and larger bodies hold onto more. The phenomenon is called Bergmann's rule, and it helps animals stay  comfortable  in different environments.
"We had good reason to expect that increasing temperatures would lead to reductions in body size, based on previous studies," said the study's lead author, Brian Weeks,  assistant professor at  University of Michigan School for Environment and Sustainability. "The thing that was shocking was how consistent it was. I was incredibly surprised that all of these species are responding in such similar ways."
The findings were consistent with a 2017 study that researched the breeding of wild zebra finches across a range of temperatures. Scientists found that a hotter climate during breeding periods produced smaller birds.
Authors of the most recent study, however, also noted that other complications of climate change, such as food limitation, could have something to do with body size reduction. 



U.N. climate talks end with no deal on carbon markets; Issues pushed to next summit in Scotland



MADRID - Marathon international climate talks ended Sunday as major polluters resisted calls to ramp up efforts to keep global warming at bay and negotiators postponed the regulation of global carbon markets until next year.
Those failures came even after organizers added two  days to the 12 days of scheduled talks.  Delegates from almost 200 nations endorsed a declaration to help poor countries that are suffering the effects of climate change, although they didn't allocate any new funds to do so.
The final declaration cited the "urgent need" to cut planet-heating greenhouse gases in line with the goals of the 2015 Paris climate change accord. That fell far short of promising to enhance countries' pledges to cut gases next year, which developing countries and environmentalists lobbied the delegates to achieve.
The Paris accord established the common goal of avoiding a temperature increase of more than 2.7 degrees Fahrenheit by the end of the century. The potential consequences of a temperature rise include rising sea levels and fiercer storms.
Negotiators left some of the thorniest issues for the next climate summit in Glasgow, Scotland, in a year, including the liability for damages caused by rising temperatures. That demand from developing countries was resisted mainly by the United States.
U.N. Secretary-General Antnio Guterres said he was "disappointed" by the meeting's outcome.
"The international community lost an important opportunity to show increased ambition on mitigation, adaptation and finance to tackle the climate crisis," he said. "We must not give up, and I will not give up."
"It's sad that we couldn't reach a final agreement" on carbon markets, said the climate summit's chair, Carolina Schmidt, Chile's environment minister.
"We were on the verge," she said, adding that the goal was to establish markets that are "robust and environmentally sustainable."
Putting a price on emissions of carbon dioxide, the main greenhouse gas, would allow countries or companies to trade emissions permits that could be steadily reduced to encourage businesses to transition to low-emission technologies.
Some observers  said no deal on how to govern the exchange of carbon credits was better than a weak one that could undermine a dozen or so regional carbon mechanisms.
Helen Mountford from the environmental think-tank World Resources Institute said that "given the high risks of loopholes discussed in Madrid, it was better to delay than accept rules that would have compromised the integrity of the Paris Agreement."
The climate talks were accompanied by protests from indigenous people and environmental groups that reflected the growing frustration, particularly among young people, at the slow pace of governments' efforts to curb climate change.
"The Paris Agreement may have been the victim of a hit-and-run by a handful of powerful carbon economies, but they are on the wrong side of this struggle, the wrong side of history," said Jennifer Morgan, Greenpeace International's executive director.
"Climate blockers like Brazil and Saudi Arabia, enabled by an irresponsibly weak Chilean leadership, peddled carbon deals and steamrolled scientists and civil society," Morgan said.
Chile chaired the talks, which had to be moved to Madrid amid violent anti-government protests back home. Despite the pressure, the Chilean government of President Sebastin Piera supported holding on to coal-fired power plants until 2040.
Countries agreed to designate funds for the most vulnerable countries to compensate them for the effects of extreme weather, one of the most pressing issues for small island states, despite the U.S. resistance to the liability issue. The delegates didn't clarify how to mobilize $100 billion per year in climate financing by 2020, as it had been agreed in Paris.
The European Union and Canada  adopted plans to become carbon-neutral by mid-century, but activists said their leadership failed to resonate among other world powers.
About 80 countries, less than half of those taking part in the talks and accounting altogether for about one-tenth of global emissions, expressed intentions to upgrade their pledges next year for net zero emissions targets by 2050.
Nearly 400 cities, more than 780 businesses and 16 investors with more than $4 trillion in assets committed to similar goals.
Observers said big emissions emitters such as China, the United States and India need to stop shirking their responsibilities.
"Regressive governments put profit over the planetary crisis and the future of generations to come," the conservation group WWF said in a statement.
Mountford said the talks this year "reflect how disconnected country leaders are from the urgency of the science and the demands of their citizens in the streets."
"They need to wake up in 2020," she said. 



Northeast warming faster than rest of US



For one scientist, climate change in the Northeast announces itself in the abnormal appearances of warm-water fish - an abundance of mahi-mahi and unprecedented sightings in January of Gulf Stream flounder and juvenile black sea bass in shallow waters off New England.
"Nobody had ever seen that before," said Glen Gawarkiewicz of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in Massachusetts.
For another scientist, the phenomenon materializes in ocean temperatures, which have been rising for more than a generation, influencing coastal weather and pushing snowfall farther inland.
"Our winters now are not like our winters before," said Lenny Giuliano, state meteorologist in Rhode Island.
As water temperatures rise in the Atlantic Ocean and its connected gulfs and bays, the warmth may  spread inland and generate temperature variations  at the county level.
The water-to-land effect appears along the Great Lakes, which also are warming, said Mark Wysocki, New York state climatologist and a professor at Cornell University.
"There's a very strong connection," Wysocki said.
Though the Southwest saw the greatest rise in average air temperatures during the past five decades, data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration shows the Northeast warmed the most over both longer and shorter time spans.
Nowhere more so than Rhode Island: The state's average temperature has increased 3.64 degrees compared with its 20th-century norm, according to records dating back to 1895.
States could be seeing a "troughing" effect, in which cold air drops from the north  and draws warmer air up the coast, said David Robinson, the New Jersey state climatologist at Rutgers University.
Such an effect caused 50 mph wind gusts on Halloween night in New Jersey, Robinson said. He linked it to a tornado in Morris County, about 25 miles west of New York City.
Wysocki points to a naturally occurring shift in an air pattern called the North Atlantic Oscillation, which can play a role in air temperatures in the Northeast.
Many agree that water temperatures probably play a role.
"You see so much variability in temperature over land throughout the year," said Ambarish Karmalkar, a  researcher at the University of Massachusetts and the U.S. Department of the Interior's Northeast Climate Adaptation Science Center. "Variability over the ocean is much smaller. ... It takes much longer to warm the ocean and takes much longer to cool it."
Though researchers said the dynamic hasn't fully been studied,  data shows the effect down to the county level. Over the past five years, the four Connecticut counties hugging the coastline averaged 2.9 degrees warmer than normal, compared with 2.6 degrees for the four inland counties.
In Rhode Island, a half-degree difference separated Washington County on the coast and Providence County in the north. In Massachusetts, temperatures in Nantucket and Boston registered nearly a full degree higher than average compared with inland areas around the town of Amherst in Hampshire County.
Differences of 1 or more degrees separated Wicomico County on Maryland's Delmarva Peninsula from the interior of the state, as well as Philadelphia from the Allegheny Mountains and downstate New York from the Adirondacks.
It's even more amplified in Pennsylvania and New York where mountain ranges act as natural barriers, blocking warmer air coming from the coast.
"It's hard for a marine climate to move far inland," Wysocki said.
In general, climatologists and other researchers in the Northeast said that although there's no doubt global climate change drives warmer air and water temperatures overall, there's still much to learn about the interaction between the two. Among the most important inquiries is determining what's here to stay and what will change with the wind. 
